Who'sthere?
Nay,answerme:stand,andunfoldyourself.
Longlivetheking!
Bernardo?
He.
Youcomemostcarefullyuponyourhour.
'Tisnowstrucktwelve;gettheetobed,Francisco.
Forthisreliefmuchthanks:'tisbittercold,
AndIamsickatheart.
Haveyouhadquietguard?
Notamousestirring.
Well,goodnight.
IfyoudomeetHoratioandMarcellus,
Therivalsofmywatch,bidthemmakehaste.
IthinkIhearthem.Stand,ho!Who'sthere?
Friendstothisground.
AndliegementotheDane.
Giveyougoodnight.
O,farewell,honestsoldier:
Whohathrelievedyou?
Bernardohasmyplace.
Giveyougoodnight.
Holla!Bernardo!
Say,
What,isHoratiothere?
Apieceofhim.
Welcome,Horatio:welcome,goodMarcellus.
What,hasthisthingappear'dagainto-night?
Ihaveseennothing.
Horatiosays'tisbutourfantasy,
Andwillnotletbelieftakeholdofhim
Touchingthisdreadedsight,twiceseenofus:
ThereforeIhaveentreatedhimalong
Withustowatchtheminutesofthisnight;
Thatifagainthisapparitioncome,
Hemayapproveoureyesandspeaktoit.
Tush,tush,'twillnotappear.
Sitdownawhile;
Andletusonceagainassailyourears,
Thataresofortifiedagainstourstory
Whatwehavetwonightsseen.
Well,sitwedown,
AndletushearBernardospeakofthis.
Lastnightofall,
Whenyondsamestarthat'swestwardfromthepole
Hadmadehiscoursetoillumethatpartofheaven
Wherenowitburns,Marcellusandmyself,
Thebellthenbeatingone,--
Peace,breaktheeoff;look,whereitcomesagain!
Inthesamefigure,likethekingthat'sdead.
Thouartascholar;speaktoit,Horatio.
Looksitnotliketheking?markit,Horatio.
Mostlike:itharrowsmewithfearandwonder.
Itwouldbespoketo.
Questionit,Horatio.
Whatartthouthatusurp'stthistimeofnight,
Togetherwiththatfairandwarlikeform
InwhichthemajestyofburiedDenmark
Didsometimesmarch?byheavenIchargethee,speak!
Itisoffended.
See,itstalksaway!
Stay!speak,speak!Ichargethee,speak!
'Tisgone,andwillnotanswer.
Hownow,Horatio!youtrembleandlookpale:
Isnotthissomethingmorethanfantasy?
Whatthinkyouon't?
BeforemyGod,Imightnotthisbelieve
Withoutthesensibleandtrueavouch
Ofmineowneyes.
Isitnotliketheking?
Asthouarttothyself:
Suchwastheveryarmourhehadon
WhenhetheambitiousNorwaycombated;
Sofrown'dheonce,when,inanangryparle,
HesmotethesleddedPolacksontheice.
'Tisstrange.
Thustwicebefore,andjumpatthisdeadhour,
Withmartialstalkhathhegonebyourwatch.
InwhatparticularthoughttoworkIknownot;
Butinthegrossandscopeofmyopinion,
Thisbodessomestrangeeruptiontoourstate.
Goodnow,sitdown,andtellme,hethatknows,
Whythissamestrictandmostobservantwatch
Sonightlytoilsthesubjectoftheland,
Andwhysuchdailycastofbrazencannon,
Andforeignmartforimplementsofwar;
Whysuchimpressofshipwrights,whosesoretask
DoesnotdividetheSundayfromtheweek;
Whatmightbetoward,thatthissweatyhaste
Dothmakethenightjoint-labourerwiththeday:
Whois'tthatcaninformme?
ThatcanI;
Atleast,thewhispergoesso.Ourlastking,
Whoseimageevenbutnowappear'dtous,
Was,asyouknow,byFortinbrasofNorway,
Theretoprick'donbyamostemulatepride,
Daredtothecombat;inwhichourvaliantHamlet--
Forsothissideofourknownworldesteem'dhim--
DidslaythisFortinbras;whobyaseal'dcompact,
Wellratifiedbylawandheraldry,
Didforfeit,withhislife,allthosehislands
Whichhestoodseizedof,totheconqueror:
Againstthewhich,amoietycompetent
Wasgagedbyourking;whichhadreturn'd
TotheinheritanceofFortinbras,
Hadhebeenvanquisher;as,bythesamecovenant,
Andcarriageofthearticledesign'd,
HisfelltoHamlet.Now,sir,youngFortinbras,
Ofunimprovedmettlehotandfull,
HathintheskirtsofNorwayhereandthere
Shark'dupalistoflawlessresolutes,
Forfoodanddiet,tosomeenterprise
Thathathastomachin't;whichisnoother--
Asitdothwellappearuntoourstate--
Buttorecoverofus,bystronghand
Andtermscompulsatory,thoseforesaidlands
Sobyhisfatherlost:andthis,Itakeit,
Isthemainmotiveofourpreparations,
Thesourceofthisourwatchandthechiefhead
Ofthispost-hasteandromageintheland.
Ithinkitbenootherbute'enso:
Wellmayitsortthatthisportentousfigure
Comesarmedthroughourwatch;soliketheking
Thatwasandisthequestionofthesewars.
Amoteitistotroublethemind'seye.
InthemosthighandpalmystateofRome,
AlittleerethemightiestJuliusfell,
Thegravesstoodtenantlessandthesheeteddead
DidsqueakandgibberintheRomanstreets:
Asstarswithtrainsoffireanddewsofblood,
Disastersinthesun;andthemoiststar
UponwhoseinfluenceNeptune'sempirestands
Wassickalmosttodoomsdaywitheclipse:
Andeventhelikeprecurseoffierceevents,
Asharbingersprecedingstillthefates
Andprologuetotheomencomingon,
Haveheavenandearthtogetherdemonstrated
Untoourclimaturesandcountrymen.--
Butsoft,behold!lo,whereitcomesagain!
I'llcrossit,thoughitblastme.Stay,illusion!
Ifthouhastanysound,oruseofvoice,
Speaktome:
Iftherebeanygoodthingtobedone,
Thatmaytotheedoeaseandgracetome,
Speaktome:
Ifthouartprivytothycountry'sfate,
Which,happily,foreknowingmayavoid,O,speak!
Orifthouhastuphoardedinthylife
Extortedtreasureinthewombofearth,
Forwhich,theysay,youspiritsoftwalkindeath,
Speakofit:stay,andspeak!Stopit,Marcellus.
ShallIstrikeatitwithmypartisan?
Do,ifitwillnotstand.
'Tishere!
'Tishere!
'Tisgone!
Wedoitwrong,beingsomajestical,
Toofferittheshowofviolence;
Foritis,astheair,invulnerable,
Andourvainblowsmaliciousmockery.
Itwasabouttospeak,whenthecockcrew.
Andthenitstartedlikeaguiltything
Uponafearfulsummons.Ihaveheard,
Thecock,thatisthetrumpettothemorn,
Dothwithhisloftyandshrill-soundingthroat
Awakethegodofday;and,athiswarning,
Whetherinseaorfire,inearthorair,
Theextravagantanderringspirithies
Tohisconfine:andofthetruthherein
Thispresentobjectmadeprobation.
Itfadedonthecrowingofthecock.
Somesaythatever'gainstthatseasoncomes
WhereinourSaviour'sbirthiscelebrated,
Thebirdofdawningsingethallnightlong:
Andthen,theysay,nospiritdaresstirabroad;
Thenightsarewholesome;thennoplanetsstrike,
Nofairytakes,norwitchhathpowertocharm,
Sohallow'dandsograciousisthetime.
SohaveIheardanddoinpartbelieveit.
But,look,themorn,inrussetmantleclad,
Walkso'erthedewofyonhigheastwardhill:
Breakweourwatchup;andbymyadvice,
Letusimpartwhatwehaveseento-night
UntoyoungHamlet;for,uponmylife,
Thisspirit,dumbtous,willspeaktohim.
Doyouconsentweshallacquainthimwithit,
Asneedfulinourloves,fittingourduty?
Let'sdo't,Ipray;andIthismorningknow
Whereweshallfindhimmostconveniently.
ThoughyetofHamletourdearbrother'sdeath
Thememorybegreen,andthatitusbefitted
Tobearourheartsingriefandourwholekingdom
Tobecontractedinonebrowofwoe,
Yetsofarhathdiscretionfoughtwithnature
Thatwewithwisestsorrowthinkonhim,
Togetherwithremembranceofourselves.
Thereforeoursometimesister,nowourqueen,
Theimperialjointresstothiswarlikestate,
Havewe,as'twerewithadefeatedjoy,--
Withanauspiciousandadroppingeye,
Withmirthinfuneralandwithdirgeinmarriage,
Inequalscaleweighingdelightanddole,--
Takentowife:norhavewehereinbarr'd
Yourbetterwisdoms,whichhavefreelygone
Withthisaffairalong.Forall,ourthanks.
Nowfollows,thatyouknow,youngFortinbras,
Holdingaweaksupposalofourworth,
Orthinkingbyourlatedearbrother'sdeath
Ourstatetobedisjointandoutofframe,
Colleaguedwiththedreamofhisadvantage,
Hehathnotfail'dtopesteruswithmessage,
Importingthesurrenderofthoselands
Lostbyhisfather,withallbondsoflaw,
Toourmostvaliantbrother.Somuchforhim.
Nowforourselfandforthistimeofmeeting:
Thusmuchthebusinessis:wehaveherewrit
ToNorway,uncleofyoungFortinbras,--
Who,impotentandbed-rid,scarcelyhears
Ofthishisnephew'spurpose,--tosuppress
Hisfurthergaitherein;inthatthelevies,
Thelistsandfullproportions,areallmade
Outofhissubject:andweheredispatch
You,goodCornelius,andyou,Voltimand,
ForbearersofthisgreetingtooldNorway;
Givingtoyounofurtherpersonalpower
Tobusinesswiththeking,morethanthescope
Ofthesedelatedarticlesallow.
Farewell,andletyourhastecommendyourduty.
Inthatandallthingswillweshowourduty.
Wedoubtitnothing:heartilyfarewell.
Andnow,Laertes,what'sthenewswithyou?
Youtoldusofsomesuit;whatis't,Laertes?
YoucannotspeakofreasontotheDane,
Andlooseyourvoice:whatwouldstthoubeg,Laertes,
Thatshallnotbemyoffer,notthyasking?
Theheadisnotmorenativetotheheart,
Thehandmoreinstrumentaltothemouth,
ThanisthethroneofDenmarktothyfather.
Whatwouldstthouhave,Laertes?
Mydreadlord,
YourleaveandfavourtoreturntoFrance;
FromwhencethoughwillinglyIcametoDenmark,
Toshowmydutyinyourcoronation,
Yetnow,Imustconfess,thatdutydone,
MythoughtsandwishesbendagaintowardFrance
Andbowthemtoyourgraciousleaveandpardon.
Haveyouyourfather'sleave?WhatsaysPolonius?
Hehath,mylord,wrungfrommemyslowleave
Bylaboursomepetition,andatlast
UponhiswillIseal'dmyhardconsent:
Idobeseechyou,givehimleavetogo.
Takethyfairhour,Laertes;timebethine,
Andthybestgracesspenditatthywill!
Butnow,mycousinHamlet,andmyson,--
<STAGEDIR>Aside</STAGEDIR>Alittlemorethankin,andlessthankind.
Howisitthatthecloudsstillhangonyou?
Notso,mylord;Iamtoomuchi'thesun.
GoodHamlet,castthynightedcolouroff,
AndletthineeyelooklikeafriendonDenmark.
Donotforeverwiththyvailedlids
Seekforthynoblefatherinthedust:
Thouknow'st'tiscommon;allthatlivesmustdie,
Passingthroughnaturetoeternity.
Ay,madam,itiscommon.
Ifitbe,
Whyseemsitsoparticularwiththee?
Seems,madam!nayitis;Iknownot'seems.'
'Tisnotalonemyinkycloak,goodmother,
Norcustomarysuitsofsolemnblack,
Norwindysuspirationofforcedbreath,
No,northefruitfulriverintheeye,
Northedejected'haviorofthevisage,
Togetherwithallforms,moods,shapesofgrief,
Thatcandenotemetruly:theseindeedseem,
Fortheyareactionsthatamanmightplay:
ButIhavethatwithinwhichpassethshow;
Thesebutthetrappingsandthesuitsofwoe.
'Tissweetandcommendableinyournature,Hamlet,
Togivethesemourningdutiestoyourfather:
But,youmustknow,yourfatherlostafather;
Thatfatherlost,losthis,andthesurvivorbound
Infilialobligationforsometerm
Todoobsequioussorrow:buttopersever
Inobstinatecondolementisacourse
Ofimpiousstubbornness;'tisunmanlygrief;
Itshowsawillmostincorrecttoheaven,
Aheartunfortified,amindimpatient,
Anunderstandingsimpleandunschool'd:
Forwhatweknowmustbeandisascommon
Asanythemostvulgarthingtosense,
Whyshouldweinourpeevishopposition
Takeittoheart?Fie!'tisafaulttoheaven,
Afaultagainstthedead,afaulttonature,
Toreasonmostabsurd:whosecommontheme
Isdeathoffathers,andwhostillhathcried,
Fromthefirstcorsetillhethatdiedto-day,
'Thismustbeso.'Weprayyou,throwtoearth
Thisunprevailingwoe,andthinkofus
Asofafather:forlettheworldtakenote,
Youarethemostimmediatetoourthrone;
Andwithnolessnobilityoflove
Thanthatwhichdearestfatherbearshisson,
DoIimparttowardyou.Foryourintent
IngoingbacktoschoolinWittenberg,
Itismostretrogradetoourdesire:
Andwebeseechyou,bendyoutoremain
Here,inthecheerandcomfortofoureye,
Ourchiefestcourtier,cousin,andourson.
Letnotthymotherloseherprayers,Hamlet:
Ipraythee,staywithus;gonottoWittenberg.
Ishallinallmybestobeyyou,madam.
Why,'tisalovingandafairreply:
BeasourselfinDenmark.Madam,come;
ThisgentleandunforcedaccordofHamlet
Sitssmilingtomyheart:ingracewhereof,
NojocundhealththatDenmarkdrinksto-day,
Butthegreatcannontothecloudsshalltell,
Andtheking'srousetheheavensallbruitagain,
Re-speakingearthlythunder.Comeaway.
O,thatthistootoosolidfleshwouldmelt
Thawandresolveitselfintoadew!
OrthattheEverlastinghadnotfix'd
Hiscanon'gainstself-slaughter!OGod!God!
Howweary,stale,flatandunprofitable,
Seemtomealltheusesofthisworld!
Fieon't!ahfie!'tisanunweededgarden,
Thatgrowstoseed;thingsrankandgrossinnature
Possessitmerely.Thatitshouldcometothis!
Buttwomonthsdead:nay,notsomuch,nottwo:
Soexcellentaking;thatwas,tothis,
Hyperiontoasatyr;solovingtomymother
Thathemightnotbeteemthewindsofheaven
Visitherfacetooroughly.Heavenandearth!
MustIremember?why,shewouldhangonhim,
Asifincreaseofappetitehadgrown
Bywhatitfedon:andyet,withinamonth--
Letmenotthinkon't--Frailty,thynameiswoman!--
Alittlemonth,orerethoseshoeswereold
Withwhichshefollow'dmypoorfather'sbody,
LikeNiobe,alltears:--whyshe,evenshe--
O,God!abeast,thatwantsdiscourseofreason,
Wouldhavemourn'dlonger--marriedwithmyuncle,
Myfather'sbrother,butnomorelikemyfather
ThanItoHercules:withinamonth:
Ereyetthesaltofmostunrighteoustears
Hadlefttheflushinginhergalledeyes,
Shemarried.O,mostwickedspeed,topost
Withsuchdexteritytoincestuoussheets!
Itisnotnoritcannotcometogood:
Butbreak,myheart;forImustholdmytongue.
Hailtoyourlordship!
Iamgladtoseeyouwell:
Horatio,--orIdoforgetmyself.
Thesame,mylord,andyourpoorservantever.
Sir,mygoodfriend;I'llchangethatnamewithyou:
AndwhatmakeyoufromWittenberg,Horatio?Marcellus?
Mygoodlord--
Iamverygladtoseeyou.Goodeven,sir.
Butwhat,infaith,makeyoufromWittenberg?
Atruantdisposition,goodmylord.
Iwouldnothearyourenemysayso,
Norshallyoudomineearthatviolence,
Tomakeittrusterofyourownreport
Againstyourself:Iknowyouarenotruant.
ButwhatisyouraffairinElsinore?
We'llteachyoutodrinkdeepereyoudepart.
Mylord,Icametoseeyourfather'sfuneral.
Ipraythee,donotmockme,fellow-student;
Ithinkitwastoseemymother'swedding.
Indeed,mylord,itfollow'dhardupon.
Thrift,thrift,Horatio!thefuneralbakedmeats
Didcoldlyfurnishforththemarriagetables.
WouldIhadmetmydearestfoeinheaven
OreverIhadseenthatday,Horatio!
Myfather!--methinksIseemyfather.
Where,mylord?
Inmymind'seye,Horatio.
Isawhimonce;hewasagoodlyking.
Hewasaman,takehimforallinall,
Ishallnotlookuponhislikeagain.
Mylord,IthinkIsawhimyesternight.
Saw?who?
Mylord,thekingyourfather.
Thekingmyfather!
Seasonyouradmirationforawhile
Withanattentear,tillImaydeliver,
Uponthewitnessofthesegentlemen,
Thismarveltoyou.
ForGod'slove,letmehear.
Twonightstogetherhadthesegentlemen,
MarcellusandBernardo,ontheirwatch,
Inthedeadvastandmiddleofthenight,
Beenthusencounter'd.Afigurelikeyourfather,
Armedatpointexactly,cap-a-pe,
Appearsbeforethem,andwithsolemnmarch
Goesslowandstatelybythem:thricehewalk'd
Bytheiroppress'dandfear-surprisedeyes,
Withinhistruncheon'slength;whilstthey,distilled
Almosttojellywiththeactoffear,
Standdumbandspeaknottohim.Thistome
Indreadfulsecrecyimparttheydid;
AndIwiththemthethirdnightkeptthewatch;
Where,astheyhaddeliver'd,bothintime,
Formofthething,eachwordmadetrueandgood,
Theapparitioncomes:Iknewyourfather;
Thesehandsarenotmorelike.
Butwherewasthis?
Mylord,upontheplatformwherewewatch'd.
Didyounotspeaktoit?
Mylord,Idid;
Butanswermadeitnone:yetoncemethought
Itliftedupitsheadanddidaddress
Itselftomotion,likeasitwouldspeak;
Buteventhenthemorningcockcrewloud,
Andatthesounditshrunkinhasteaway,
Andvanish'dfromoursight.
'Tisverystrange.
AsIdolive,myhonour'dlord,'tistrue;
Andwedidthinkitwritdowninourduty
Toletyouknowofit.
Indeed,indeed,sirs,butthistroublesme.
Holdyouthewatchto-night?
Wedo,mylord.
Arm'd,sayyou?
Arm'd,mylord.
Fromtoptotoe?
Mylord,fromheadtofoot.
Thensawyounothisface?
O,yes,mylord;heworehisbeaverup.
What,look'dhefrowningly?
Acountenancemoreinsorrowthaninanger.
Paleorred?
Nay,verypale.
Andfix'dhiseyesuponyou?
Mostconstantly.
IwouldIhadbeenthere.
Itwouldhavemuchamazedyou.
Verylike,verylike.Stay'ditlong?
Whileonewithmoderatehastemighttellahundred.
Longer,longer.
NotwhenIsaw't.
Hisbeardwasgrizzled--no?
Itwas,asIhaveseenitinhislife,
Asablesilver'd.
Iwillwatchto-night;
Perchance'twillwalkagain.
Iwarrantitwill.
Ifitassumemynoblefather'sperson,
I'llspeaktoit,thoughhellitselfshouldgape
Andbidmeholdmypeace.Iprayyouall,
Ifyouhavehithertoconceal'dthissight,
Letitbetenableinyoursilencestill;
Andwhatsoeverelseshallhapto-night,
Giveitanunderstanding,butnotongue:
Iwillrequiteyourloves.So,fareyouwell:
Upontheplatform,'twixtelevenandtwelve,
I'llvisityou.
Ourdutytoyourhonour.
Yourloves,asminetoyou:farewell.
Myfather'sspiritinarms!allisnotwell;
Idoubtsomefoulplay:wouldthenightwerecome!
Tillthensitstill,mysoul:fouldeedswillrise,
Thoughalltheeartho'erwhelmthem,tomen'seyes.
Mynecessariesareembark'd:farewell:
And,sister,asthewindsgivebenefit
Andconvoyisassistant,donotsleep,
Butletmehearfromyou.
Doyoudoubtthat?
ForHamletandthetriflingofhisfavour,
Holditafashionandatoyinblood,
Avioletintheyouthofprimynature,
Forward,notpermanent,sweet,notlasting,
Theperfumeandsupplianceofaminute;Nomore.
Nomorebutso?
Thinkitnomore;
Fornature,crescent,doesnotgrowalone
Inthewsandbulk,but,asthistemplewaxes,
Theinwardserviceofthemindandsoul
Growswidewithal.Perhapshelovesyounow,
Andnownosoilnorcauteldothbesmirch
Thevirtueofhiswill:butyoumustfear,
Hisgreatnessweigh'd,hiswillisnothisown;
Forhehimselfissubjecttohisbirth:
Hemaynot,asunvaluedpersonsdo,
Carveforhimself;foronhischoicedepends
Thesafetyandhealthofthiswholestate;
Andthereforemusthischoicebecircumscribed
Untothevoiceandyieldingofthatbody
Whereofheisthehead.Thenifhesayshelovesyou,
Itfitsyourwisdomsofartobelieveit
Asheinhisparticularactandplace
Maygivehissayingdeed;whichisnofurther
ThanthemainvoiceofDenmarkgoeswithal.
Thenweighwhatlossyourhonourmaysustain,
Ifwithtoocredentearyoulisthissongs,
Orloseyourheart,oryourchastetreasureopen
Tohisunmaster'dimportunity.
Fearit,Ophelia,fearit,mydearsister,
Andkeepyouintherearofyouraffection,
Outoftheshotanddangerofdesire.
Thechariestmaidisprodigalenough,
Ifsheunmaskherbeautytothemoon:
Virtueitself'scapesnotcalumniousstrokes:
Thecankergallstheinfantsofthespring,
Toooftbeforetheirbuttonsbedisclosed,
Andinthemornandliquiddewofyouth
Contagiousblastmentsaremostimminent.
Bewarythen;bestsafetyliesinfear:
Youthtoitselfrebels,thoughnoneelsenear.
Ishalltheeffectofthisgoodlessonkeep,
Aswatchmantomyheart.But,goodmybrother,
Donot,assomeungraciouspastorsdo,
Showmethesteepandthornywaytoheaven;
Whiles,likeapuff'dandrecklesslibertine,
Himselftheprimrosepathofdalliancetreads,
Andrecksnothisownrede.
O,fearmenot.
Istaytoolong:butheremyfathercomes.
Adoubleblessingisadoublegrace,
Occasionsmilesuponasecondleave.
Yethere,Laertes!aboard,aboard,forshame!
Thewindsitsintheshoulderofyoursail,
Andyouarestay'dfor.There;myblessingwiththee!
Andthesefewpreceptsinthymemory
Seethoucharacter.Givethythoughtsnotongue,
Noranyunproportionedthoughthisact.
Bethoufamiliar,butbynomeansvulgar.
Thosefriendsthouhast,andtheiradoptiontried,
Grapplethemtothysoulwithhoopsofsteel;
Butdonotdullthypalmwithentertainment
Ofeachnew-hatch'd,unfledgedcomrade.Beware
Ofentrancetoaquarrel,butbeingin,
Bear'tthattheopposedmaybewareofthee.
Giveeverymanthyear,butfewthyvoice;
Takeeachman'scensure,butreservethyjudgment.
Costlythyhabitasthypursecanbuy,
Butnotexpress'dinfancy;rich,notgaudy;
Fortheappareloftproclaimstheman,
AndtheyinFranceofthebestrankandstation
Areofamostselectandgenerouschiefinthat.
Neitheraborrowernoralenderbe;
Forloanoftlosesbothitselfandfriend,
Andborrowingdullstheedgeofhusbandry.
Thisaboveall:tothineownselfbetrue,
Anditmustfollow,asthenighttheday,
Thoucanstnotthenbefalsetoanyman.
Farewell:myblessingseasonthisinthee!
MosthumblydoItakemyleave,mylord.
Thetimeinvitesyou;go;yourservantstend.
Farewell,Ophelia;andrememberwell
WhatIhavesaidtoyou.
'Tisinmymemorylock'd,
Andyouyourselfshallkeepthekeyofit.
Farewell.
Whatis't,Ophelia,behathsaidtoyou?
Sopleaseyou,somethingtouchingtheLordHamlet.
Marry,wellbethought:
'Tistoldme,hehathveryoftoflate
Givenprivatetimetoyou;andyouyourself
Haveofyouraudiencebeenmostfreeandbounteous:
Ifitbeso,asso'tisputonme,
Andthatinwayofcaution,Imusttellyou,
Youdonotunderstandyourselfsoclearly
Asitbehovesmydaughterandyourhonour.
Whatisbetweenyou?givemeupthetruth.
Hehath,mylord,oflatemademanytenders
Ofhisaffectiontome.
Affection!pooh!youspeaklikeagreengirl,
Unsiftedinsuchperilouscircumstance.
Doyoubelievehistenders,asyoucallthem?
Idonotknow,mylord,whatIshouldthink.
Marry,I'llteachyou:thinkyourselfababy;
Thatyouhaveta'enthesetendersfortruepay,
Whicharenotsterling.Tenderyourselfmoredearly;
Or--nottocrackthewindofthepoorphrase,
Runningitthus--you'lltendermeafool.
Mylord,hehathimportunedmewithlove
Inhonourablefashion.
Ay,fashionyoumaycallit;goto,goto.
Andhathgivencountenancetohisspeech,mylord,
Withalmostalltheholyvowsofheaven.
Ay,springestocatchwoodcocks.Idoknow,
Whenthebloodburns,howprodigalthesoul
Lendsthetonguevows:theseblazes,daughter,
Givingmorelightthanheat,extinctinboth,
Evenintheirpromise,asitisa-making,
Youmustnottakeforfire.Fromthistime
Besomewhatscanterofyourmaidenpresence;
Setyourentreatmentsatahigherrate
Thanacommandtoparley.ForLordHamlet,
Believesomuchinhim,thatheisyoung
Andwithalargertethermayhewalk
Thanmaybegivenyou:infew,Ophelia,
Donotbelievehisvows;fortheyarebrokers,
Notofthatdyewhichtheirinvestmentsshow,
Butmereimploratorsofunholysuits,
Breathinglikesanctifiedandpiousbawds,
Thebettertobeguile.Thisisforall:
Iwouldnot,inplainterms,fromthistimeforth,
Haveyousoslanderanymomentleisure,
AstogivewordsortalkwiththeLordHamlet.
Lookto't,Ichargeyou:comeyourways.
Ishallobey,mylord.
Theairbitesshrewdly;itisverycold.
Itisanippingandaneagerair.
Whathournow?
Ithinkitlacksoftwelve.
No,itisstruck.
Indeed?Ihearditnot:thenitdrawsneartheseason
Whereinthespiritheldhiswonttowalk.
Whatdoesthismean,mylord?
Thekingdothwaketo-nightandtakeshisrouse,
Keepswassail,andtheswaggeringup-springreels;
And,ashedrainshisdraughtsofRhenishdown,
Thekettle-drumandtrumpetthusbrayout
Thetriumphofhispledge.
Isitacustom?
Ay,marry,is't:
Buttomymind,thoughIamnativehere
Andtothemannerborn,itisacustom
Morehonour'dinthebreachthantheobservance.
Thisheavy-headedreveleastandwest
Makesustraducedandtax'dofothernations:
Theyclepeusdrunkards,andwithswinishphrase
Soilouraddition;andindeedittakes
Fromourachievements,thoughperform'datheight,
Thepithandmarrowofourattribute.
So,oftitchancesinparticularmen,
Thatforsomeviciousmoleofnatureinthem,
As,intheirbirth--whereintheyarenotguilty,
Sincenaturecannotchoosehisorigin--
Bytheo'ergrowthofsomecomplexion,
Oftbreakingdownthepalesandfortsofreason,
Orbysomehabitthattoomucho'er-leavens
Theformofplausivemanners,thatthesemen,
Carrying,Isay,thestampofonedefect,
Beingnature'slivery,orfortune'sstar,--
Theirvirtueselse--betheyaspureasgrace,
Asinfiniteasmanmayundergo--
Shallinthegeneralcensuretakecorruption
Fromthatparticularfault:thedramofeale
Dothallthenoblesubstanceofadoubt
Tohisownscandal.
Look,mylord,itcomes!
Angelsandministersofgracedefendus!
Bethouaspiritofhealthorgoblindamn'd,
Bringwiththeeairsfromheavenorblastsfromhell,
Bethyintentswickedorcharitable,
Thoucomestinsuchaquestionableshape
ThatIwillspeaktothee:I'llcalltheeHamlet,
King,father,royalDane:O,answerme!
Letmenotburstinignorance;buttell
Whythycanonizedbones,hearsedindeath,
Havebursttheircerements;whythesepulchre,
Whereinwesawtheequietlyinurn'd,
Hathopedhisponderousandmarblejaws,
Tocasttheeupagain.Whatmaythismean,
Thatthou,deadcorse,againincompletesteel
Revisit'stthustheglimpsesofthemoon,
Makingnighthideous;andwefoolsofnature
Sohorridlytoshakeourdisposition
Withthoughtsbeyondthereachesofoursouls?
Say,whyisthis?wherefore?whatshouldwedo?
Itbeckonsyoutogoawaywithit,
Asifitsomeimpartmentdiddesire
Toyoualone.
Look,withwhatcourteousaction
Itwavesyoutoamoreremovedground:
Butdonotgowithit.
No,bynomeans.
Itwillnotspeak;thenIwillfollowit.
Donot,mylord.
Why,whatshouldbethefear?
Idonotsetmylifeinapin'sfee;
Andformysoul,whatcanitdotothat,
Beingathingimmortalasitself?
Itwavesmeforthagain:I'llfollowit.
Whatifittemptyoutowardtheflood,mylord,
Ortothedreadfulsummitofthecliff
Thatbeetleso'erhisbaseintothesea,
Andthereassumesomeotherhorribleform,
Whichmightdepriveyoursovereigntyofreason
Anddrawyouintomadness?thinkofit:
Theveryplaceputstoysofdesperation,
Withoutmoremotive,intoeverybrain
Thatlookssomanyfathomstothesea
Andhearsitroarbeneath.
Itwavesmestill.
Goon;I'llfollowthee.
Youshallnotgo,mylord.
Holdoffyourhands.
Beruled;youshallnotgo.
Myfatecriesout,
Andmakeseachpettyarteryinthisbody
AshardyastheNemeanlion'snerve.
StillamIcall'd.Unhandme,gentlemen.
Byheaven,I'llmakeaghostofhimthatletsme!
Isay,away!Goon;I'llfollowthee.
Hewaxesdesperatewithimagination.
Let'sfollow;'tisnotfitthustoobeyhim.
Haveafter.Towhatissuewillthiscome?
SomethingisrotteninthestateofDenmark.
Heavenwilldirectit.
Nay,let'sfollowhim.
Wherewiltthouleadme?speak;I'llgonofurther.
Markme.
Iwill.
Myhourisalmostcome,
WhenItosulphurousandtormentingflames
Mustrenderupmyself.
Alas,poorghost!
Pitymenot,butlendthyserioushearing
TowhatIshallunfold.
Speak;Iamboundtohear.
Soartthoutorevenge,whenthoushalthear.
What?
Iamthyfather'sspirit,
Doom'dforacertaintermtowalkthenight,
Andforthedayconfinedtofastinfires,
Tillthefoulcrimesdoneinmydaysofnature
Areburntandpurgedaway.ButthatIamforbid
Totellthesecretsofmyprison-house,
Icouldataleunfoldwhoselightestword
Wouldharrowupthysoul,freezethyyoungblood,
Makethytwoeyes,likestars,startfromtheirspheres,
Thyknottedandcombinedlockstopart
Andeachparticularhairtostandonend,
Likequillsuponthefretfulporpentine:
Butthiseternalblazonmustnotbe
Toearsoffleshandblood.List,list,O,list!
Ifthoudidsteverthydearfatherlove--
OGod!
Revengehisfoulandmostunnaturalmurder.
Murder!
Murdermostfoul,asinthebestitis;
Butthismostfoul,strangeandunnatural.
Hastemetoknow't,thatI,withwingsasswift
Asmeditationorthethoughtsoflove,
Maysweeptomyrevenge.
Ifindtheeapt;
Anddullershouldstthoubethanthefatweed
ThatrootsitselfineaseonLethewharf,
Wouldstthounotstirinthis.Now,Hamlet,hear:
'Tisgivenoutthat,sleepinginmyorchard,
Aserpentstungme;sothewholeearofDenmark
Isbyaforgedprocessofmydeath
Ranklyabused:butknow,thounobleyouth,
Theserpentthatdidstingthyfather'slife
Nowwearshiscrown.
Omypropheticsoul!Myuncle!
Ay,thatincestuous,thatadulteratebeast,
Withwitchcraftofhiswit,withtraitorousgifts,--
Owickedwitandgifts,thathavethepower
Sotoseduce!--wontohisshamefullust
Thewillofmymostseeming-virtuousqueen:
OHamlet,whatafalling-offwasthere!
Fromme,whoselovewasofthatdignity
Thatitwenthandinhandevenwiththevow
Imadetoherinmarriage,andtodecline
Uponawretchwhosenaturalgiftswerepoor
Tothoseofmine!
Butvirtue,asitneverwillbemoved,
Thoughlewdnesscourtitinashapeofheaven,
Solust,thoughtoaradiantangellink'd,
Willsateitselfinacelestialbed,
Andpreyongarbage.
But,soft!methinksIscentthemorningair;
Briefletmebe.Sleepingwithinmyorchard,
Mycustomalwaysoftheafternoon,
Uponmysecurehourthyunclestole,
Withjuiceofcursedhebenoninavial,
Andintheporchesofmyearsdidpour
Theleperousdistilment;whoseeffect
Holdssuchanenmitywithbloodofman
Thatswiftasquicksilveritcoursesthrough
Thenaturalgatesandalleysofthebody,
Andwithasuddenvigourdothposset
Andcurd,likeeagerdroppingsintomilk,
Thethinandwholesomeblood:sodiditmine;
Andamostinstanttetterbark'dabout,
Mostlazar-like,withvileandloathsomecrust,
Allmysmoothbody.
ThuswasI,sleeping,byabrother'shand
Oflife,ofcrown,ofqueen,atoncedispatch'd:
Cutoffevenintheblossomsofmysin,
Unhousel'd,disappointed,unanel'd,
Noreckoningmade,butsenttomyaccount
Withallmyimperfectionsonmyhead:
O,horrible!O,horrible!mosthorrible!
Ifthouhastnatureinthee,bearitnot;
LetnottheroyalbedofDenmarkbe
Acouchforluxuryanddamnedincest.
But,howsoeverthoupursuestthisact,
Taintnotthymind,norletthysoulcontrive
Againstthymotheraught:leavehertoheaven
Andtothosethornsthatinherbosomlodge,
Toprickandstingher.Faretheewellatonce!
Theglow-wormshowsthematintobenear,
And'ginstopalehisuneffectualfire:
Adieu,adieu!Hamlet,rememberme.
Oallyouhostofheaven!Oearth!whatelse?
AndshallIcouplehell?O,fie!Hold,hold,myheart;
Andyou,mysinews,grownotinstantold,
Butbearmestifflyup.Rememberthee!
Ay,thoupoorghost,whilememoryholdsaseat
Inthisdistractedglobe.Rememberthee!
Yea,fromthetableofmymemory
I'llwipeawayalltrivialfondrecords,
Allsawsofbooks,allforms,allpressurespast,
Thatyouthandobservationcopiedthere;
Andthycommandmentallaloneshalllive
Withinthebookandvolumeofmybrain,
Unmix'dwithbasermatter:yes,byheaven!
Omostperniciouswoman!
Ovillain,villain,smiling,damnedvillain!
Mytables,--meetitisIsetitdown,
Thatonemaysmile,andsmile,andbeavillain;
AtleastI'msureitmaybesoinDenmark:
So,uncle,thereyouare.Nowtomyword;
Itis'Adieu,adieu!rememberme.'
Ihavesworn't.
<STAGEDIR>Within</STAGEDIR>Mylord,mylord,--
<STAGEDIR>Within</STAGEDIR>LordHamlet,--
<STAGEDIR>Within</STAGEDIR>Heavensecurehim!
Sobeit!
<STAGEDIR>Within</STAGEDIR>Hillo,ho,ho,mylord!
Hillo,ho,ho,boy!come,bird,come.
Howis't,mynoblelord?
Whatnews,mylord?
O,wonderful!
Goodmylord,tellit.
No;you'llrevealit.
NotI,mylord,byheaven.
NorI,mylord.
Howsayyou,then;wouldheartofmanoncethinkit?
Butyou'llbesecret?
Ay,byheaven,mylord.
There'sne'eravillaindwellinginallDenmark
Buthe'sanarrantknave.
Thereneedsnoghost,mylord,comefromthegrave
Totellusthis.
Why,right;youarei'theright;
Andso,withoutmorecircumstanceatall,
Iholditfitthatweshakehandsandpart:
You,asyourbusinessanddesireshallpointyou;
Foreverymanhasbusinessanddesire,
Suchasitis;andformineownpoorpart,
Lookyou,I'llgopray.
Thesearebutwildandwhirlingwords,mylord.
I'msorrytheyoffendyou,heartily;
Yes,'faithheartily.
There'snooffence,mylord.
Yes,bySaintPatrick,butthereis,Horatio,
Andmuchoffencetoo.Touchingthisvisionhere,
Itisanhonestghost,thatletmetellyou:
Foryourdesiretoknowwhatisbetweenus,
O'ermaster'tasyoumay.Andnow,goodfriends,
Asyouarefriends,scholarsandsoldiers,
Givemeonepoorrequest.
Whatis't,mylord?wewill.
Nevermakeknownwhatyouhaveseento-night.
Mylord,wewillnot.
Nay,butswear't.
Infaith,
Mylord,notI.
NorI,mylord,infaith.
Uponmysword.
Wehavesworn,mylord,already.
Indeed,uponmysword,indeed.
<STAGEDIR>Beneath</STAGEDIR>Swear.
Ah,ha,boy!say'stthouso?artthouthere,
truepenny?
Comeon--youhearthisfellowinthecellarage--
Consenttoswear.
Proposetheoath,mylord.
Nevertospeakofthisthatyouhaveseen,
Swearbymysword.
<STAGEDIR>Beneath</STAGEDIR>Swear.
Hicetubique?thenwe'llshiftourground.
Comehither,gentlemen,
Andlayyourhandsagainuponmysword:
Nevertospeakofthisthatyouhaveheard,
Swearbymysword.
<STAGEDIR>Beneath</STAGEDIR>Swear.
Wellsaid,oldmole!canstworki'theearthsofast?
Aworthypioner!Oncemoreremove,goodfriends.
Odayandnight,butthisiswondrousstrange!
Andthereforeasastrangergiveitwelcome.
Therearemorethingsinheavenandearth,Horatio,
Thanaredreamtofinyourphilosophy.Butcome;
Here,asbefore,never,sohelpyoumercy,
Howstrangeoroddsoe'erIbearmyself,
AsIperchancehereaftershallthinkmeet
Toputananticdispositionon,
Thatyou,atsuchtimesseeingme,nevershall,
Witharmsencumber'dthus,orthisheadshake,
Orbypronouncingofsomedoubtfulphrase,
As'Well,well,weknow,'or'Wecould,anifwewould,'
Or'Ifwelisttospeak,'or'Therebe,aniftheymight,'
Orsuchambiguousgivingout,tonote
Thatyouknowaughtofme:thisnottodo,
Sograceandmercyatyourmostneedhelpyou,Swear.
<STAGEDIR>Beneath</STAGEDIR>Swear.
Rest,rest,perturbedspirit!
So,gentlemen,
WithallmyloveIdocommendmetoyou:
AndwhatsopooramanasHamletis
Maydo,toexpresshisloveandfriendingtoyou,
Godwilling,shallnotlack.Letusgointogether;
Andstillyourfingersonyourlips,Ipray.
Thetimeisoutofjoint:Ocursedspite,
ThateverIwasborntosetitright!
Nay,come,let'sgotogether.
Givehimthismoneyandthesenotes,Reynaldo.
Iwill,mylord.
Youshalldomarvellouswisely,goodReynaldo,
Beforeyouvisithim,tomakeinquire
Ofhisbehavior.
Mylord,Ididintendit.
Marry,wellsaid;verywellsaid.Lookyou,sir,
InquiremefirstwhatDanskersareinParis;
Andhow,andwho,whatmeans,andwheretheykeep,
Whatcompany,atwhatexpense;andfinding
Bythisencompassmentanddriftofquestion
Thattheydoknowmyson,comeyoumorenearer
Thanyourparticulardemandswilltouchit:
Takeyou,as'twere,somedistantknowledgeofhim;
Asthus,'Iknowhisfatherandhisfriends,
Andinparthim:'doyoumarkthis,Reynaldo?
Ay,verywell,mylord.
'Andinparthim;but'youmaysay'notwell:
But,if'tbeheImean,he'sverywild;
Addictedsoandso:'andthereputonhim
Whatforgeriesyouplease;marry,nonesorank
Asmaydishonourhim;takeheedofthat;
But,sir,suchwanton,wildandusualslips
Asarecompanionsnotedandmostknown
Toyouthandliberty.
Asgaming,mylord.
Ay,ordrinking,fencing,swearing,quarrelling,
Drabbing:youmaygosofar.
Mylord,thatwoulddishonourhim.
'Faith,no;asyoumayseasonitinthecharge
Youmustnotputanotherscandalonhim,
Thatheisopentoincontinency;
That'snotmymeaning:butbreathehisfaultssoquaintly
Thattheymayseemthetaintsofliberty,
Theflashandoutbreakofafierymind,
Asavagenessinunreclaimedblood,
Ofgeneralassault.
But,mygoodlord,--
Whereforeshouldyoudothis?
Ay,mylord,
Iwouldknowthat.
Marry,sir,here'smydrift;
AndIbelieve,itisafetchofwit:
Youlayingtheseslightsulliesonmyson,
As'twereathingalittlesoil'di'theworking,Markyou,
Yourpartyinconverse,himyouwouldsound,
Havingeverseenintheprenominatecrimes
Theyouthyoubreatheofguilty,beassured
Hecloseswithyouinthisconsequence;
'Goodsir,'orso,or'friend,'or'gentleman,'
Accordingtothephraseortheaddition
Ofmanandcountry.
Verygood,mylord.
Andthen,sir,doeshethis--hedoes--whatwasI
abouttosay?Bythemass,Iwasabouttosay
something:wheredidIleave?
At'closesintheconsequence,'at'friendorso,'
and'gentleman.'
At'closesintheconsequence,'ay,marry;
Heclosesthus:'Iknowthegentleman;
Isawhimyesterday,ort'otherday,
Orthen,orthen;withsuch,orsuch;and,asyousay,
Therewasa'gaming;thereo'ertookin'srouse;
Therefallingoutattennis:'orperchance,
'Isawhimentersuchahouseofsale,'
Videlicet,abrothel,orsoforth.
Seeyounow;
Yourbaitoffalsehoodtakesthiscarpoftruth:
Andthusdoweofwisdomandofreach,
Withwindlassesandwithassaysofbias,
Byindirectionsfinddirectionsout:
Sobymyformerlectureandadvice,
Shallyoumyson.Youhaveme,haveyounot?
Mylord,Ihave.
Godbewi'you;fareyouwell.
Goodmylord!
Observehisinclinationinyourself.
Ishall,mylord.
Andlethimplyhismusic.
Well,mylord.
Farewell!
Hownow,Ophelia!what'sthematter?
O,mylord,mylord,Ihavebeensoaffrighted!
Withwhat,i'thenameofGod?
Mylord,asIwassewinginmycloset,
LordHamlet,withhisdoubletallunbraced;
Nohatuponhishead;hisstockingsfoul'd,
Ungarter'd,anddown-gyvedtohisancle;
Paleashisshirt;hiskneesknockingeachother;
Andwithalooksopiteousinpurport
Asifhehadbeenloosedoutofhell
Tospeakofhorrors,--hecomesbeforeme.
Madforthylove?
Mylord,Idonotknow;
Buttruly,Idofearit.
Whatsaidhe?
Hetookmebythewristandheldmehard;
Thengoeshetothelengthofallhisarm;
And,withhisotherhandthuso'erhisbrow,
Hefallstosuchperusalofmyface
Ashewoulddrawit.Longstay'dheso;
Atlast,alittleshakingofminearm
Andthricehisheadthuswavingupanddown,
Heraisedasighsopiteousandprofound
Asitdidseemtoshatterallhisbulk
Andendhisbeing:thatdone,heletsmego:
And,withhisheadoverhisshoulderturn'd,
Heseem'dtofindhiswaywithouthiseyes;
Forouto'doorshewentwithouttheirhelps,
And,tothelast,bendedtheirlightonme.
Come,gowithme:Iwillgoseektheking.
Thisistheveryecstasyoflove,
Whoseviolentpropertyfordoesitself
Andleadsthewilltodesperateundertakings
Asoftasanypassionunderheaven
Thatdoesafflictournatures.Iamsorry.
What,haveyougivenhimanyhardwordsoflate?
No,mygoodlord,but,asyoudidcommand,
Ididrepelhisfettersanddenied
Hisaccesstome.
Thathathmadehimmad.
Iamsorrythatwithbetterheedandjudgment
Ihadnotquotedhim:Ifear'dhedidbuttrifle,
Andmeanttowreckthee;but,beshrewmyjealousy!
Byheaven,itisaspropertoourage
Tocastbeyondourselvesinouropinions
Asitiscommonfortheyoungersort
Tolackdiscretion.Come,gowetotheking:
Thismustbeknown;which,beingkeptclose,might
move
Moregrieftohidethanhatetoutterlove.
Welcome,dearRosencrantzandGuildenstern!
Moreoverthatwemuchdidlongtoseeyou,
Theneedwehavetouseyoudidprovoke
Ourhastysending.Somethinghaveyouheard
OfHamlet'stransformation;socallit,
Sithnortheexteriornortheinwardman
Resemblesthatitwas.Whatitshouldbe,
Morethanhisfather'sdeath,thatthushathputhim
Somuchfromtheunderstandingofhimself,
Icannotdreamof:Ientreatyouboth,
That,beingofsoyoungdaysbroughtupwithhim,
Andsithsoneighbour'dtohisyouthandhavior,
Thatyouvouchsafeyourresthereinourcourt
Somelittletime:sobyyourcompanies
Todrawhimontopleasures,andtogather,
Somuchasfromoccasionyoumayglean,
Whetheraught,tousunknown,afflictshimthus,
That,open'd,lieswithinourremedy.
Goodgentlemen,hehathmuchtalk'dofyou;
AndsureIamtwomentherearenotliving
Towhomhemoreadheres.Ifitwillpleaseyou
Toshowussomuchgentryandgoodwill
Astoexpendyourtimewithusawhile,
Forthesupplyandprofitofourhope,
Yourvisitationshallreceivesuchthanks
Asfitsaking'sremembrance.
Bothyourmajesties
Might,bythesovereignpoweryouhaveofus,
Putyourdreadpleasuresmoreintocommand
Thantoentreaty.
Butwebothobey,
Andheregiveupourselves,inthefullbent
Tolayourservicefreelyatyourfeet,
Tobecommanded.
Thanks,RosencrantzandgentleGuildenstern.
Thanks,GuildensternandgentleRosencrantz:
AndIbeseechyouinstantlytovisit
Mytoomuchchangedson.Go,someofyou,
AndbringthesegentlemenwhereHamletis.
Heavensmakeourpresenceandourpractises
Pleasantandhelpfultohim!
Ay,amen!
TheambassadorsfromNorway,mygoodlord,
Arejoyfullyreturn'd.
Thoustillhastbeenthefatherofgoodnews.
HaveI,mylord?Iassuremygoodliege,
Iholdmyduty,asIholdmysoul,
BothtomyGodandtomygraciousking:
AndIdothink,orelsethisbrainofmine
Huntsnotthetrailofpolicysosure
Asithathusedtodo,thatIhavefound
TheverycauseofHamlet'slunacy.
O,speakofthat;thatdoIlongtohear.
Givefirstadmittancetotheambassadors;
Mynewsshallbethefruittothatgreatfeast.
Thyselfdogracetothem,andbringthemin.
Hetellsme,mydearGertrude,hehathfound
Theheadandsourceofallyourson'sdistemper.
Idoubtitisnootherbutthemain;
Hisfather'sdeath,andouro'erhastymarriage.
Well,weshallsifthim.
Welcome,mygoodfriends!
Say,Voltimand,whatfromourbrotherNorway?
Mostfairreturnofgreetingsanddesires.
Uponourfirst,hesentouttosuppress
Hisnephew'slevies;whichtohimappear'd
Tobeapreparation'gainstthePolack;
But,betterlook'dinto,hetrulyfound
Itwasagainstyourhighness:whereatgrieved,
Thatsohissickness,ageandimpotence
Wasfalselyborneinhand,sendsoutarrests
OnFortinbras;whichhe,inbrief,obeys;
ReceivesrebukefromNorway,andinfine
Makesvowbeforehisunclenevermore
Togivetheassayofarmsagainstyourmajesty.
WhereonoldNorway,overcomewithjoy,
Giveshimthreethousandcrownsinannualfee,
Andhiscommissiontoemploythosesoldiers,
Soleviedasbefore,againstthePolack:
Withanentreaty,hereinfurthershown,
Thatitmightpleaseyoutogivequietpass
Throughyourdominionsforthisenterprise,
Onsuchregardsofsafetyandallowance
Asthereinaresetdown.
Itlikesuswell;
Andatourmoreconsider'dtimewellread,
Answer,andthinkuponthisbusiness.
Meantimewethankyouforyourwell-tooklabour:
Gotoyourrest;atnightwe'llfeasttogether:
Mostwelcomehome!
Thisbusinessiswellended.
Myliege,andmadam,toexpostulate
Whatmajestyshouldbe,whatdutyis,
Whydayisday,nightnight,andtimeistime,
Werenothingbuttowastenight,dayandtime.
Therefore,sincebrevityisthesoulofwit,
Andtediousnessthelimbsandoutwardflourishes,
Iwillbebrief:yournoblesonismad:
MadcallIit;for,todefinetruemadness,
Whatis'tbuttobenothingelsebutmad?
Butletthatgo.
Morematter,withlessart.
Madam,IswearIusenoartatall.
Thatheismad,'tistrue:'tistrue'tispity;
Andpity'tis'tistrue:afoolishfigure;
Butfarewellit,forIwillusenoart.
Madletusgranthim,then:andnowremains
Thatwefindoutthecauseofthiseffect,
Orrathersay,thecauseofthisdefect,
Forthiseffectdefectivecomesbycause:
Thusitremains,andtheremainderthus.Perpend.
Ihaveadaughter--havewhilesheismine--
Who,inherdutyandobedience,mark,
Hathgivenmethis:nowgather,andsurmise.
'Tothecelestialandmysoul'sidol,themost
beautifiedOphelia,'--
That'sanillphrase,avilephrase;'beautified'is
avilephrase:butyoushallhear.Thus:
'Inherexcellentwhitebosom,these,&amp;c.'
CamethisfromHamlettoher?
Goodmadam,stayawhile;Iwillbefaithful.
'Doubtthouthestarsarefire;
Doubtthatthesundothmove;
Doubttruthtobealiar;
ButneverdoubtIlove.
'OdearOphelia,Iamillatthesenumbers;
Ihavenotarttoreckonmygroans:butthat
Ilovetheebest,Omostbest,believeit.Adieu.
'Thineevermoremostdearlady,whilst
thismachineistohim,HAMLET.'
This,inobedience,hathmydaughtershownme,
Andmoreabove,hathhissolicitings,
Astheyfelloutbytime,bymeansandplace,
Allgiventomineear.
Buthowhathshe
Receivedhislove?
Whatdoyouthinkofme?
Asofamanfaithfulandhonourable.
Iwouldfainproveso.Butwhatmightyouthink,
WhenIhadseenthishotloveonthewing--
AsIperceivedit,Imusttellyouthat,
Beforemydaughtertoldme--whatmightyou,
Ormydearmajestyyourqueenhere,think,
IfIhadplay'dthedeskortable-book,
Orgivenmyheartawinking,muteanddumb,
Orlook'duponthislovewithidlesight;
Whatmightyouthink?No,Iwentroundtowork,
AndmyyoungmistressthusIdidbespeak:
'LordHamletisaprince,outofthystar;
Thismustnotbe:'andthenIpreceptsgaveher,
Thatsheshouldlockherselffromhisresort,
Admitnomessengers,receivenotokens.
Whichdone,shetookthefruitsofmyadvice;
Andhe,repulsed--ashorttaletomake--
Fellintoasadness,thenintoafast,
Thencetoawatch,thenceintoaweakness,
Thencetoalightness,and,bythisdeclension,
Intothemadnesswhereinnowheraves,
Andallwemournfor.
Doyouthink'tisthis?
Itmaybe,verylikely.
Haththerebeensuchatime--I'dfainknowthat--
ThatIhavepositivelysaid'Tisso,'
Whenitprovedotherwise?
NotthatIknow.
<STAGEDIR>Pointingtohisheadandshoulder</STAGEDIR>
Takethisfromthis,ifthisbeotherwise:
Ifcircumstancesleadme,Iwillfind
Wheretruthishid,thoughitwerehidindeed
Withinthecentre.
Howmaywetryitfurther?
Youknow,sometimeshewalksfourhourstogether
Hereinthelobby.
Sohedoesindeed.
AtsuchatimeI'llloosemydaughtertohim:
BeyouandIbehindanarrasthen;
Marktheencounter:ifhelovehernot
Andbenotfromhisreasonfall'nthereon,
Letmebenoassistantforastate,
Butkeepafarmandcarters.
Wewilltryit.
But,look,wheresadlythepoorwretchcomesreading.
Away,Idobeseechyou,bothaway:
I'llboardhimpresently.
O,givemeleave:
HowdoesmygoodLordHamlet?
Well,God-a-mercy.
Doyouknowme,mylord?
Excellentwell;youareafishmonger.
NotI,mylord.
ThenIwouldyouweresohonestaman.
Honest,mylord!
Ay,sir;tobehonest,asthisworldgoes,istobe
onemanpickedoutoftenthousand.
That'sverytrue,mylord.
Forifthesunbreedmaggotsinadeaddog,beinga
godkissingcarrion,--Haveyouadaughter?
Ihave,mylord.
Lethernotwalki'thesun:conceptionisa
blessing:butnotasyourdaughtermayconceive.
Friend,lookto't.
<STAGEDIR>Aside</STAGEDIR>Howsayyoubythat?Stillharpingonmy
daughter:yetheknewmenotatfirst;hesaidI
wasafishmonger:heisfargone,fargone:and
trulyinmyyouthIsufferedmuchextremityfor
love;verynearthis.I'llspeaktohimagain.
Whatdoyouread,mylord?
Words,words,words.
Whatisthematter,mylord?
Betweenwho?
Imean,thematterthatyouread,mylord.
Slanders,sir:forthesatiricalroguesayshere
thatoldmenhavegreybeards,thattheirfacesare
wrinkled,theireyespurgingthickamberand
plum-treegumandthattheyhaveaplentifullackof
wit,togetherwithmostweakhams:allwhich,sir,
thoughImostpowerfullyandpotentlybelieve,yet
Iholditnothonestytohaveitthussetdown,for
yourself,sir,shouldbeoldasIam,iflikeacrab
youcouldgobackward.
<STAGEDIR>Aside</STAGEDIR>Thoughthisbemadness,yetthereismethod
in't.Willyouwalkoutoftheair,mylord?
Intomygrave.
Indeed,thatisouto'theair.
Howpregnantsometimeshisrepliesare!ahappiness
thatoftenmadnesshitson,whichreasonandsanity
couldnotsoprosperouslybedeliveredof.Iwill
leavehim,andsuddenlycontrivethemeansof
meetingbetweenhimandmydaughter.--Myhonourable
lord,Iwillmosthumblytakemyleaveofyou.
Youcannot,sir,takefrommeanythingthatIwill
morewillinglypartwithal:exceptmylife,except
mylife,exceptmylife.
Fareyouwell,mylord.
Thesetediousoldfools!
YougotoseektheLordHamlet;thereheis.
<STAGEDIR>ToPOLONIUS</STAGEDIR>Godsaveyou,sir!
Myhonouredlord!
Mymostdearlord!
Myexcellentgoodfriends!Howdostthou,
Guildenstern?Ah,Rosencrantz!Goodlads,howdoyeboth?
Astheindifferentchildrenoftheearth.
Happy,inthatwearenotover-happy;
Onfortune'scapwearenottheverybutton.
Northesolesofhershoe?
Neither,mylord.
Thenyouliveaboutherwaist,orinthemiddleof
herfavours?
'Faith,herprivateswe.
Inthesecretpartsoffortune?O,mosttrue;she
isastrumpet.What'sthenews?
None,mylord,butthattheworld'sgrownhonest.
Thenisdoomsdaynear:butyournewsisnottrue.
Letmequestionmoreinparticular:whathaveyou,
mygoodfriends,deservedatthehandsoffortune,
thatshesendsyoutoprisonhither?
Prison,mylord!
Denmark'saprison.
Thenistheworldone.
Agoodlyone;inwhichtherearemanyconfines,
wardsanddungeons,Denmarkbeingoneo'theworst.
Wethinknotso,mylord.
Why,then,'tisnonetoyou;forthereisnothing
eithergoodorbad,butthinkingmakesitso:tome
itisaprison.
Whythen,yourambitionmakesitone;'tistoo
narrowforyourmind.
OGod,Icouldbeboundedinanutshellandcount
myselfakingofinfinitespace,wereitnotthatI
havebaddreams.
Whichdreamsindeedareambition,forthevery
substanceoftheambitiousismerelytheshadowofadream.
Adreamitselfisbutashadow.
Truly,andIholdambitionofsoairyandlighta
qualitythatitisbutashadow'sshadow.
Thenareourbeggarsbodies,andourmonarchsand
outstretchedheroesthebeggars'shadows.Shallwe
tothecourt?for,bymyfay,Icannotreason.
We'llwaituponyou.
Nosuchmatter:Iwillnotsortyouwiththerest
ofmyservants,for,tospeaktoyoulikeanhonest
man,Iammostdreadfullyattended.But,inthe
beatenwayoffriendship,whatmakeyouatElsinore?
Tovisityou,mylord;nootheroccasion.
BeggarthatIam,Iamevenpoorinthanks;butI
thankyou:andsure,dearfriends,mythanksare
toodearahalfpenny.Wereyounotsentfor?Isit
yourowninclining?Isitafreevisitation?Come,
dealjustlywithme:come,come;nay,speak.
Whatshouldwesay,mylord?
Why,anything,buttothepurpose.Youweresent
for;andthereisakindofconfessioninyourlooks
whichyourmodestieshavenotcraftenoughtocolour:
Iknowthegoodkingandqueenhavesentforyou.
Towhatend,mylord?
Thatyoumustteachme.Butletmeconjureyou,by
therightsofourfellowship,bytheconsonancyof
ouryouth,bytheobligationofourever-preserved
love,andbywhatmoredearabetterproposercould
chargeyouwithal,beevenanddirectwithme,
whetheryouweresentfor,orno?
<STAGEDIR>AsidetoGUILDENSTERN</STAGEDIR>Whatsayyou?
<STAGEDIR>Aside</STAGEDIR>Nay,then,Ihaveaneyeofyou.--Ifyou
loveme,holdnotoff.
Mylord,weweresentfor.
Iwilltellyouwhy;soshallmyanticipation
preventyourdiscovery,andyoursecrecytotheking
andqueenmoultnofeather.Ihaveoflate--but
whereforeIknownot--lostallmymirth,forgoneall
customofexercises;andindeeditgoessoheavily
withmydispositionthatthisgoodlyframe,the
earth,seemstomeasterilepromontory,thismost
excellentcanopy,theair,lookyou,thisbrave
o'erhangingfirmament,thismajesticalrooffretted
withgoldenfire,why,itappearsnootherthingto
methanafoulandpestilentcongregationofvapours.
Whatapieceofworkisaman!hownobleinreason!
howinfiniteinfaculty!informandmovinghow
expressandadmirable!inactionhowlikeanangel!
inapprehensionhowlikeagod!thebeautyofthe
world!theparagonofanimals!Andyet,tome,
whatisthisquintessenceofdust?mandelightsnot
me:no,norwomanneither,thoughbyyoursmiling
youseemtosayso.
Mylord,therewasnosuchstuffinmythoughts.
Whydidyoulaughthen,whenIsaid'mandelightsnotme'?
Tothink,mylord,ifyoudelightnotinman,what
lentenentertainmenttheplayersshallreceivefrom
you:wecotedthemontheway;andhitherarethey
coming,toofferyouservice.
Hethatplaysthekingshallbewelcome;hismajesty
shallhavetributeofme;theadventurousknight
shallusehisfoilandtarget;thelovershallnot
sighgratis;thehumourousmanshallendhispart
inpeace;theclownshallmakethoselaughwhose
lungsaretickledo'thesere;andtheladyshall
sayhermindfreely,ortheblankverseshallhalt
for't.Whatplayersarethey?
Eventhoseyouwerewonttotakedelightin,the
tragediansofthecity.
Howchancesittheytravel?theirresidence,both
inreputationandprofit,wasbetterbothways.
Ithinktheirinhibitioncomesbythemeansofthe
lateinnovation.
DotheyholdthesameestimationtheydidwhenIwas
inthecity?aretheysofollowed?
No,indeed,aretheynot.
Howcomesit?dotheygrowrusty?
Nay,theirendeavourkeepsinthewontedpace:but
thereis,sir,anaeryofchildren,littleeyases,
thatcryoutonthetopofquestion,andaremost
tyrannicallyclappedfor't:thesearenowthe
fashion,andsoberattlethecommonstages--sothey
callthem--thatmanywearingrapiersareafraidof
goose-quillsanddarescarcecomethither.
What,aretheychildren?whomaintains'em?howare
theyescoted?Willtheypursuethequalityno
longerthantheycansing?willtheynotsay
afterwards,iftheyshouldgrowthemselvestocommon
players--asitismostlike,iftheirmeansareno
better--theirwritersdothemwrong,tomakethem
exclaimagainsttheirownsuccession?
'Faith,therehasbeenmuchtodoonbothsides;and
thenationholdsitnosintotarrethemto
controversy:therewas,forawhile,nomoneybid
forargument,unlessthepoetandtheplayerwentto
cuffsinthequestion.
Is'tpossible?
O,therehasbeenmuchthrowingaboutofbrains.
Dotheboyscarryitaway?
Ay,thattheydo,mylord;Herculesandhisloadtoo.
Itisnotverystrange;formineuncleiskingof
Denmark,andthosethatwouldmakemowsathimwhile
myfatherlived,givetwenty,forty,fifty,an
hundredducatsa-pieceforhispictureinlittle.
'Sblood,thereissomethinginthismorethan
natural,ifphilosophycouldfinditout.
Therearetheplayers.
Gentlemen,youarewelcometoElsinore.Yourhands,
comethen:theappurtenanceofwelcomeisfashion
andceremony:letmecomplywithyouinthisgarb,
lestmyextenttotheplayers,which,Itellyou,
mustshowfairlyoutward,shouldmoreappearlike
entertainmentthanyours.Youarewelcome:butmy
uncle-fatherandaunt-motheraredeceived.
Inwhat,mydearlord?
Iambutmadnorth-north-west:whenthewindis
southerlyIknowahawkfromahandsaw.
Wellbewithyou,gentlemen!
Harkyou,Guildenstern;andyoutoo:ateacheara
hearer:thatgreatbabyyouseethereisnotyet
outofhisswaddling-clouts.
Happilyhe'sthesecondtimecometothem;forthey
sayanoldmanistwiceachild.
Iwillprophesyhecomestotellmeoftheplayers;
markit.Yousayright,sir:o'Mondaymorning;
'twassoindeed.
Mylord,Ihavenewstotellyou.
Mylord,Ihavenewstotellyou.
WhenRosciuswasanactorinRome,--
Theactorsarecomehither,mylord.
Buz,buz!
Uponminehonour,--
Thencameeachactoronhisass,--
Thebestactorsintheworld,eitherfortragedy,
comedy,history,pastoral,pastoral-comical,
historical-pastoral,tragical-historical,tragical-
comical-historical-pastoral,sceneindividable,or
poemunlimited:Senecacannotbetooheavy,nor
Plautustoolight.Forthelawofwritandthe
liberty,thesearetheonlymen.
OJephthah,judgeofIsrael,whatatreasurehadstthou!
Whatatreasurehadhe,mylord?
Why,
'Onefairdaughterandnomore,
Thewhichhelovedpassingwell.'
<STAGEDIR>Aside</STAGEDIR>Stillonmydaughter.
AmInoti'theright,oldJephthah?
IfyoucallmeJephthah,mylord,Ihaveadaughter
thatIlovepassingwell.
Nay,thatfollowsnot.
Whatfollows,then,mylord?
Why,
'Asbylot,Godwot,'
andthen,youknow,
'Itcametopass,asmostlikeitwas,'--
thefirstrowofthepiouschansonwillshowyou
more;forlook,wheremyabridgementcomes.
Youarewelcome,masters;welcome,all.Iamglad
toseetheewell.Welcome,goodfriends.O,myold
friend!thyfaceisvalencedsinceIsawtheelast:
comestthoutobeardmeinDenmark?What,myyoung
ladyandmistress!By'rlady,yourladyshipis
nearertoheaventhanwhenIsawyoulast,bythe
altitudeofachopine.PrayGod,yourvoice,like
apieceofuncurrentgold,benotcrackedwithinthe
ring.Masters,youareallwelcome.We'lle'en
to'tlikeFrenchfalconers,flyatanythingwesee:
we'llhaveaspeechstraight:come,giveusataste
ofyourquality;come,apassionatespeech.
Whatspeech,mylord?
Iheardtheespeakmeaspeechonce,butitwas
neveracted;or,ifitwas,notaboveonce;forthe
play,Iremember,pleasednotthemillion;'twas
caviaretothegeneral:butitwas--asIreceived
it,andothers,whosejudgmentsinsuchmatters
criedinthetopofmine--anexcellentplay,well
digestedinthescenes,setdownwithasmuch
modestyascunning.Iremember,onesaidthere
werenosalletsinthelinestomakethematter
savoury,nornomatterinthephrasethatmight
indicttheauthorofaffectation;butcalleditan
honestmethod,aswholesomeassweet,andbyvery
muchmorehandsomethanfine.OnespeechinitI
chieflyloved:'twasAeneas'taletoDido;and
thereaboutofitespecially,wherehespeaksof
Priam'sslaughter:ifitliveinyourmemory,begin
atthisline:letmesee,letmesee--
'TheruggedPyrrhus,liketheHyrcanianbeast,'--
itisnotso:--itbeginswithPyrrhus:--
'TheruggedPyrrhus,hewhosesablearms,
Blackashispurpose,didthenightresemble
Whenhelaycouchedintheominoushorse,
Hathnowthisdreadandblackcomplexionsmear'd
Withheraldrymoredismal;headtofoot
Nowishetotalgules;horridlytrick'd
Withbloodoffathers,mothers,daughters,sons,
Bakedandimpastedwiththeparchingstreets,
Thatlendatyrannousanddamnedlight
Totheirlord'smurder:roastedinwrathandfire,
Andthuso'er-sizedwithcoagulategore,
Witheyeslikecarbuncles,thehellishPyrrhus
OldgrandsirePriamseeks.'
So,proceedyou.
'ForeGod,mylord,wellspoken,withgoodaccentand
gooddiscretion.
'Anonhefindshim
StrikingtooshortatGreeks;hisantiquesword,
Rebellioustohisarm,lieswhereitfalls,
Repugnanttocommand:unequalmatch'd,
PyrrhusatPriamdrives;inragestrikeswide;
Butwiththewhiffandwindofhisfellsword
Theunnervedfatherfalls.ThensenselessIlium,
Seemingtofeelthisblow,withflamingtop
Stoopstohisbase,andwithahideouscrash
TakesprisonerPyrrhus'ear:for,lo!hissword,
Whichwasdecliningonthemilkyhead
OfreverendPriam,seem'di'theairtostick:
So,asapaintedtyrant,Pyrrhusstood,
Andlikeaneutraltohiswillandmatter,
Didnothing.
But,asweoftensee,againstsomestorm,
Asilenceintheheavens,therackstandstill,
Theboldwindsspeechlessandtheorbbelow
Ashushasdeath,anonthedreadfulthunder
Dothrendtheregion,so,afterPyrrhus'pause,
Arousedvengeancesetshimnewa-work;
AndneverdidtheCyclops'hammersfall
OnMars'sarmourforgedforproofeterne
WithlessremorsethanPyrrhus'bleedingsword
NowfallsonPriam.
Out,out,thoustrumpet,Fortune!Allyougods,
Ingeneralsynod'takeawayherpower;
Breakallthespokesandfelliesfromherwheel,
Andbowltheroundnavedownthehillofheaven,
Aslowastothefiends!'
Thisistoolong.
Itshalltothebarber's,withyourbeard.Prithee,
sayon:he'sforajigorataleofbawdry,orhe
sleeps:sayon:cometoHecuba.
'Butwho,O,whohadseenthemobledqueen--'
'Themobledqueen?'
That'sgood;'mobledqueen'isgood.
'Runbarefootupanddown,threateningtheflames
Withbissonrheum;acloutuponthathead
Wherelatethediademstood,andforarobe,
Aboutherlankandallo'er-teemedloins,
Ablanket,inthealarmoffearcaughtup;
Whothishadseen,withtongueinvenomsteep'd,
'GainstFortune'sstatewouldtreasonhave
pronounced:
Butifthegodsthemselvesdidseeherthen
WhenshesawPyrrhusmakemalicioussport
Inmincingwithhisswordherhusband'slimbs,
Theinstantburstofclamourthatshemade,
Unlessthingsmortalmovethemnotatall,
Wouldhavemademilchtheburningeyesofheaven,
Andpassioninthegods.'
Look,whetherhehasnotturnedhiscolourandhas
tearsin'seyes.Prayyou,nomore.
'Tiswell:I'llhavetheespeakouttherestsoon.
Goodmylord,willyouseetheplayerswell
bestowed?Doyouhear,letthembewellused;for
theyaretheabstractandbriefchroniclesofthe
time:afteryourdeathyouwerebetterhaveabad
epitaphthantheirillreportwhileyoulive.
Mylord,Iwillusethemaccordingtotheirdesert.
God'sbodykins,man,muchbetter:useeveryman
afterhisdesert,andwhoshould'scapewhipping?
Usethemafteryourownhonouranddignity:theless
theydeserve,themoremeritisinyourbounty.
Takethemin.
Come,sirs.
Followhim,friends:we'llhearaplayto-morrow.
Dostthouhearme,oldfriend;canyouplaythe
MurderofGonzago?
Ay,mylord.
We'llha'tto-morrownight.Youcould,foraneed,
studyaspeechofsomedozenorsixteenlines,which
Iwouldsetdownandinsertin't,couldyounot?
Ay,mylord.
Verywell.Followthatlord;andlookyoumockhim
not.
Mygoodfriends,I'llleaveyoutillnight:youare
welcometoElsinore.
Goodmylord!
Ay,so,Godbewi'ye;
NowIamalone.
O,whatarogueandpeasantslaveamI!
Isitnotmonstrousthatthisplayerhere,
Butinafiction,inadreamofpassion,
Couldforcehissoulsotohisownconceit
Thatfromherworkingallhisvisagewann'd,
Tearsinhiseyes,distractionin'saspect,
Abrokenvoice,andhiswholefunctionsuiting
Withformstohisconceit?andallfornothing!
ForHecuba!
What'sHecubatohim,orhetoHecuba,
Thatheshouldweepforher?Whatwouldhedo,
Hadhethemotiveandthecueforpassion
ThatIhave?Hewoulddrownthestagewithtears
Andcleavethegeneralearwithhorridspeech,
Makemadtheguiltyandappalthefree,
Confoundtheignorant,andamazeindeed
Theveryfacultiesofeyesandears.YetI,
Adullandmuddy-mettledrascal,peak,
LikeJohn-a-dreams,unpregnantofmycause,
Andcansaynothing;no,notforaking,
Uponwhosepropertyandmostdearlife
Adamn'ddefeatwasmade.AmIacoward?
Whocallsmevillain?breaksmypateacross?
Plucksoffmybeard,andblowsitinmyface?
Tweaksmebythenose?givesmetheliei'thethroat,
Asdeepastothelungs?whodoesmethis?
Ha!
'Swounds,Ishouldtakeit:foritcannotbe
ButIampigeon-liver'dandlackgall
Tomakeoppressionbitter,orerethis
Ishouldhavefattedalltheregionkites
Withthisslave'soffal:bloody,bawdyvillain!
Remorseless,treacherous,lecherous,kindlessvillain!
O,vengeance!
Why,whatanassamI!Thisismostbrave,
ThatI,thesonofadearfathermurder'd,
Promptedtomyrevengebyheavenandhell,
Must,likeawhore,unpackmyheartwithwords,
Andfalla-cursing,likeaverydrab,
Ascullion!
Fieupon't!foh!About,mybrain!Ihaveheard
Thatguiltycreaturessittingataplay
Havebytheverycunningofthescene
Beenstrucksotothesoulthatpresently
Theyhaveproclaim'dtheirmalefactions;
Formurder,thoughithavenotongue,willspeak
Withmostmiraculousorgan.I'llhavetheseplayers
Playsomethinglikethemurderofmyfather
Beforemineuncle:I'llobservehislooks;
I'lltenthimtothequick:ifhebutblench,
Iknowmycourse.ThespiritthatIhaveseen
Maybethedevil:andthedevilhathpower
Toassumeapleasingshape;yea,andperhaps
Outofmyweaknessandmymelancholy,
Asheisverypotentwithsuchspirits,
Abusesmetodamnme:I'llhavegrounds
Morerelativethanthis:theplay'sthething
WhereinI'llcatchtheconscienceoftheking.
Andcanyou,bynodriftofcircumstance,
Getfromhimwhyheputsonthisconfusion,
Gratingsoharshlyallhisdaysofquiet
Withturbulentanddangerouslunacy?
Hedoesconfesshefeelshimselfdistracted;
Butfromwhatcausehewillbynomeansspeak.
Nordowefindhimforwardtobesounded,
But,withacraftymadness,keepsaloof,
Whenwewouldbringhimontosomeconfession
Ofhistruestate.
Didhereceiveyouwell?
Mostlikeagentleman.
Butwithmuchforcingofhisdisposition.
Niggardofquestion;but,ofourdemands,
Mostfreeinhisreply.
Didyouassayhim?
Toanypastime?
Madam,itsofellout,thatcertainplayers
Weo'er-raughtontheway:ofthesewetoldhim;
Andtheredidseeminhimakindofjoy
Tohearofit:theyareaboutthecourt,
And,asIthink,theyhavealreadyorder
Thisnighttoplaybeforehim.
'Tismosttrue:
Andhebeseech'dmetoentreatyourmajesties
Tohearandseethematter.
Withallmyheart;anditdothmuchcontentme
Tohearhimsoinclined.
Goodgentlemen,givehimafurtheredge,
Anddrivehispurposeontothesedelights.
Weshall,mylord.
SweetGertrude,leaveustoo;
ForwehavecloselysentforHamlethither,
Thathe,as'twerebyaccident,mayhere
AffrontOphelia:
Herfatherandmyself,lawfulespials,
Willsobestowourselvesthat,seeing,unseen,
Wemayoftheirencounterfranklyjudge,
Andgatherbyhim,asheisbehaved,
If'tbetheafflictionofhisloveorno
Thatthushesuffersfor.
Ishallobeyyou.
Andforyourpart,Ophelia,Idowish
Thatyourgoodbeautiesbethehappycause
OfHamlet'swildness:soshallIhopeyourvirtues
Willbringhimtohiswontedwayagain,
Tobothyourhonours.
Madam,Iwishitmay.
Ophelia,walkyouhere.Gracious,sopleaseyou,
Wewillbestowourselves.
Readonthisbook;
Thatshowofsuchanexercisemaycolour
Yourloneliness.Weareofttoblameinthis,--
'Tistoomuchproved--thatwithdevotion'svisage
Andpiousactionwedosugaro'er
Thedevilhimself.
<STAGEDIR>Aside</STAGEDIR>O,'tistootrue!
Howsmartalashthatspeechdothgivemyconscience!
Theharlot'scheek,beautiedwithplasteringart,
Isnotmoreuglytothethingthathelpsit
Thanismydeedtomymostpaintedword:
Oheavyburthen!
Ihearhimcoming:let'swithdraw,mylord.
Tobe,ornottobe:thatisthequestion:
Whether'tisnoblerinthemindtosuffer
Theslingsandarrowsofoutrageousfortune,
Ortotakearmsagainstaseaoftroubles,
Andbyopposingendthem?Todie:tosleep;
Nomore;andbyasleeptosayweend
Theheart-acheandthethousandnaturalshocks
Thatfleshisheirto,'tisaconsummation
Devoutlytobewish'd.Todie,tosleep;
Tosleep:perchancetodream:ay,there'stherub;
Forinthatsleepofdeathwhatdreamsmaycome
Whenwehaveshuffledoffthismortalcoil,
Mustgiveuspause:there'stherespect
Thatmakescalamityofsolonglife;
Forwhowouldbearthewhipsandscornsoftime,
Theoppressor'swrong,theproudman'scontumely,
Thepangsofdespisedlove,thelaw'sdelay,
Theinsolenceofofficeandthespurns
Thatpatientmeritoftheunworthytakes,
Whenhehimselfmighthisquietusmake
Withabarebodkin?whowouldfardelsbear,
Togruntandsweatunderawearylife,
Butthatthedreadofsomethingafterdeath,
Theundiscover'dcountryfromwhosebourn
Notravellerreturns,puzzlesthewill
Andmakesusratherbearthoseillswehave
Thanflytoothersthatweknownotof?
Thusconsciencedoesmakecowardsofusall;
Andthusthenativehueofresolution
Issickliedo'erwiththepalecastofthought,
Andenterprisesofgreatpithandmoment
Withthisregardtheircurrentsturnawry,
Andlosethenameofaction.--Softyounow!
ThefairOphelia!Nymph,inthyorisons
Beallmysinsremember'd.
Goodmylord,
Howdoesyourhonourforthismanyaday?
Ihumblythankyou;well,well,well.
Mylord,Ihaveremembrancesofyours,
ThatIhavelongedlongtore-deliver;
Iprayyou,nowreceivethem.
No,notI;
Inevergaveyouaught.
Myhonour'dlord,youknowrightwellyoudid;
And,withthem,wordsofsosweetbreathcomposed
Asmadethethingsmorerich:theirperfumelost,
Taketheseagain;fortothenoblemind
Richgiftswaxpoorwhengiversproveunkind.
There,mylord.
Ha,ha!areyouhonest?
Mylord?
Areyoufair?
Whatmeansyourlordship?
Thatifyoubehonestandfair,yourhonestyshould
admitnodiscoursetoyourbeauty.
Couldbeauty,mylord,havebettercommercethan
withhonesty?
Ay,truly;forthepowerofbeautywillsooner
transformhonestyfromwhatitistoabawdthanthe
forceofhonestycantranslatebeautyintohis
likeness:thiswassometimeaparadox,butnowthe
timegivesitproof.Ididloveyouonce.
Indeed,mylord,youmademebelieveso.
Youshouldnothavebelievedme;forvirtuecannot
soinoculateouroldstockbutweshallrelishof
it:Ilovedyounot.
Iwasthemoredeceived.
Gettheetoanunnery:whywouldstthoubea
breederofsinners?Iammyselfindifferenthonest;
butyetIcouldaccusemeofsuchthingsthatit
werebettermymotherhadnotborneme:Iamvery
proud,revengeful,ambitious,withmoreoffencesat
mybeckthanIhavethoughtstoputthemin,
imaginationtogivethemshape,ortimetoactthem
in.WhatshouldsuchfellowsasIdocrawling
betweenearthandheaven?Wearearrantknaves,
all;believenoneofus.Gothywaystoanunnery.
Where'syourfather?
Athome,mylord.
Letthedoorsbeshutuponhim,thathemayplaythe
foolnowherebutin'sownhouse.Farewell.
O,helphim,yousweetheavens!
Ifthoudostmarry,I'llgivetheethisplaguefor
thydowry:bethouaschasteasice,aspureas
snow,thoushaltnotescapecalumny.Gettheetoa
nunnery,go:farewell.Or,ifthouwiltneeds
marry,marryafool;forwisemenknowwellenough
whatmonstersyoumakeofthem.Toanunnery,go,
andquicklytoo.Farewell.
Oheavenlypowers,restorehim!
Ihaveheardofyourpaintingstoo,wellenough;God
hasgivenyouoneface,andyoumakeyourselves
another:youjig,youamble,andyoulisp,and
nick-nameGod'screatures,andmakeyourwantonness
yourignorance.Goto,I'llnomoreon't;ithath
madememad.Isay,wewillhavenomoremarriages:
thosethataremarriedalready,allbutone,shall
live;therestshallkeepastheyare.Toa
nunnery,go.
O,whatanoblemindishereo'erthrown!
Thecourtier's,soldier's,scholar's,eye,tongue,sword;
Theexpectancyandroseofthefairstate,
Theglassoffashionandthemouldofform,
Theobservedofallobservers,quite,quitedown!
AndI,ofladiesmostdejectandwretched,
Thatsuck'dthehoneyofhismusicvows,
Nowseethatnobleandmostsovereignreason,
Likesweetbellsjangled,outoftuneandharsh;
Thatunmatch'dformandfeatureofblownyouth
Blastedwithecstasy:O,woeisme,
TohaveseenwhatIhaveseen,seewhatIsee!
Love!hisaffectionsdonotthatwaytend;
Norwhathespake,thoughitlack'dformalittle,
Wasnotlikemadness.There'ssomethinginhissoul,
O'erwhichhismelancholysitsonbrood;
AndIdodoubtthehatchandthedisclose
Willbesomedanger:whichfortoprevent,
Ihaveinquickdetermination
Thussetitdown:heshallwithspeedtoEngland,
Forthedemandofourneglectedtribute
Haplytheseasandcountriesdifferent
Withvariableobjectsshallexpel
Thissomething-settledmatterinhisheart,
Whereonhisbrainsstillbeatingputshimthus
Fromfashionofhimself.Whatthinkyouon't?
Itshalldowell:butyetdoIbelieve
Theoriginandcommencementofhisgrief
Sprungfromneglectedlove.Hownow,Ophelia!
YouneednottelluswhatLordHamletsaid;
Wehearditall.Mylord,doasyouplease;
But,ifyouholditfit,aftertheplay
Lethisqueenmotherallaloneentreathim
Toshowhisgrief:letherberoundwithhim;
AndI'llbeplaced,sopleaseyou,intheear
Ofalltheirconference.Ifshefindhimnot,
ToEnglandsendhim,orconfinehimwhere
Yourwisdombestshallthink.
Itshallbeso:
Madnessingreatonesmustnotunwatch'dgo.
Speakthespeech,Iprayyou,asIpronounceditto
you,trippinglyonthetongue:butifyoumouthit,
asmanyofyourplayersdo,Ihadasliefthe
town-crierspokemylines.Nordonotsawtheair
toomuchwithyourhand,thus,butuseallgently;
forintheverytorrent,tempest,and,asImaysay,
thewhirlwindofpassion,youmustacquireandbeget
atemperancethatmaygiveitsmoothness.O,it
offendsmetothesoultoheararobustious
periwig-patedfellowtearapassiontotatters,to
veryrags,tosplittheearsofthegroundlings,who
forthemostpartarecapableofnothingbut
inexplicabledumbshowsandnoise:Iwouldhavesuch
afellowwhippedforo'erdoingTermagant;it
out-herodsHerod:prayyou,avoidit.
Iwarrantyourhonour.
Benottootameneither,butletyourowndiscretion
beyourtutor:suittheactiontotheword,the
wordtotheaction;withthisspecialo'erstepnot
themodestyofnature:foranythingsooverdoneis
fromthepurposeofplaying,whoseend,bothatthe
firstandnow,wasandis,tohold,as'twere,the
mirroruptonature;toshowvirtueherownfeature,
scornherownimage,andtheveryageandbodyof
thetimehisformandpressure.Nowthisoverdone,
orcometardyoff,thoughitmaketheunskilful
laugh,cannotbutmakethejudiciousgrieve;the
censureofthewhichonemustinyourallowance
o'erweighawholetheatreofothers.O,therebe
playersthatIhaveseenplay,andheardothers
praise,andthathighly,nottospeakitprofanely,
that,neitherhavingtheaccentofChristiansnor
thegaitofChristian,pagan,norman,haveso
struttedandbellowedthatIhavethoughtsomeof
nature'sjourneymenhadmademenandnotmadethem
well,theyimitatedhumanitysoabominably.
Ihopewehavereformedthatindifferentlywithus,
sir.
O,reformitaltogether.Andletthosethatplay
yourclownsspeaknomorethanissetdownforthem;
fortherebeofthemthatwillthemselveslaugh,to
setonsomequantityofbarrenspectatorstolaugh
too;though,inthemeantime,somenecessary
questionoftheplaybethentobeconsidered:
that'svillanous,andshowsamostpitifulambition
inthefoolthatusesit.Go,makeyouready.
Hownow,mylord!Iwillthekinghearthispieceofwork?
Andthequeentoo,andthatpresently.
Bidtheplayersmakehaste.
Willyoutwohelptohastenthem?
Wewill,mylord.
Whatho!Horatio!
Here,sweetlord,atyourservice.
Horatio,thouarte'enasjustaman
Ase'ermyconversationcopedwithal.
O,mydearlord,--
Nay,donotthinkIflatter;
ForwhatadvancementmayIhopefromthee
Thatnorevenuehastbutthygoodspirits,
Tofeedandclothethee?Whyshouldthepoorbeflatter'd?
No,letthecandiedtonguelickabsurdpomp,
Andcrookthepregnanthingesoftheknee
Wherethriftmayfollowfawning.Dostthouhear?
Sincemydearsoulwasmistressofherchoice
Andcouldofmendistinguish,herelection
Hathseal'dtheeforherself;forthouhastbeen
Asone,insufferingall,thatsuffersnothing,
Amanthatfortune'sbuffetsandrewards
Hastta'enwithequalthanks:andblestarethose
Whosebloodandjudgmentaresowellcommingled,
Thattheyarenotapipeforfortune'sfinger
Tosoundwhatstopsheplease.Givemethatman
Thatisnotpassion'sslave,andIwillwearhim
Inmyheart'score,ay,inmyheartofheart,
AsIdothee.--Somethingtoomuchofthis.--
Thereisaplayto-nightbeforetheking;
Onesceneofitcomesnearthecircumstance
WhichIhavetoldtheeofmyfather'sdeath:
Iprithee,whenthouseestthatactafoot,
Evenwiththeverycommentofthysoul
Observemineuncle:ifhisoccultedguilt
Donotitselfunkennelinonespeech,
Itisadamnedghostthatwehaveseen,
Andmyimaginationsareasfoul
AsVulcan'sstithy.Givehimheedfulnote;
ForImineeyeswillrivettohisface,
Andafterwewillbothourjudgmentsjoin
Incensureofhisseeming.
Well,mylord:
Ifhestealaughtthewhilstthisplayisplaying,
And'scapedetecting,Iwillpaythetheft.
Theyarecomingtotheplay;Imustbeidle:
Getyouaplace.
HowfaresourcousinHamlet?
Excellent,i'faith;ofthechameleon'sdish:Ieat
theair,promise-crammed:youcannotfeedcaponsso.
Ihavenothingwiththisanswer,Hamlet;thesewords
arenotmine.
No,norminenow.
Mylord,youplayedoncei'theuniversity,yousay?
ThatdidI,mylord;andwasaccountedagoodactor.
Whatdidyouenact?
IdidenactJuliusCaesar:Iwaskilledi'the
Capitol;Brutuskilledme.
Itwasabrutepartofhimtokillsocapitalacalf
there.Betheplayersready?
Ay,mylord;theystayuponyourpatience.
Comehither,mydearHamlet,sitbyme.
No,goodmother,here'smetalmoreattractive.
<STAGEDIR>ToKINGCLAUDIUS</STAGEDIR>O,ho!doyoumarkthat?
Lady,shallIlieinyourlap?
No,mylord.
Imean,myheaduponyourlap?
Ay,mylord.
DoyouthinkImeantcountrymatters?
Ithinknothing,mylord.
That'safairthoughttoliebetweenmaids'legs.
Whatis,mylord?
Nothing.
Youaremerry,mylord.
Who,I?
Ay,mylord.
OGod,youronlyjig-maker.Whatshouldamando
butbemerry?for,lookyou,howcheerfullymy
motherlooks,andmyfatherdiedwithinthesetwohours.
Nay,'tistwicetwomonths,mylord.
Solong?Naythen,letthedevilwearblack,for
I'llhaveasuitofsables.Oheavens!dietwo
monthsago,andnotforgottenyet?Thenthere's
hopeagreatman'smemorymayoutlivehislifehalf
ayear:but,by'rlady,hemustbuildchurches,
then;orelseshallhesuffernotthinkingon,with
thehobby-horse,whoseepitaphis'For,O,for,O,
thehobby-horseisforgot.'
Whatmeansthis,mylord?
Marry,thisismichingmallecho;itmeansmischief.
Belikethisshowimportstheargumentoftheplay.
Weshallknowbythisfellow:theplayerscannot
keepcounsel;they'lltellall.
Willhetelluswhatthisshowmeant?
Ay,oranyshowthatyou'llshowhim:benotyou
ashamedtoshow,he'llnotshametotellyouwhatitmeans.
Youarenaught,youarenaught:I'llmarktheplay.
Forus,andforourtragedy,
Herestoopingtoyourclemency,
Webegyourhearingpatiently.
Isthisaprologue,ortheposyofaring?
'Tisbrief,mylord.
Aswoman'slove.
FullthirtytimeshathPhoebus'cartgoneround
Neptune'ssaltwashandTellus'orbedground,
Andthirtydozenmoonswithborrow'dsheen
Abouttheworldhavetimestwelvethirtiesbeen,
SinceloveourheartsandHymendidourhands
Unitecommutualinmostsacredbands.
Somanyjourneysmaythesunandmoon
Makeusagaincounto'ererelovebedone!
But,woeisme,youaresosickoflate,
Sofarfromcheerandfromyourformerstate,
ThatIdistrustyou.Yet,thoughIdistrust,
Discomfortyou,mylord,itnothingmust:
Forwomen'sfearandloveholdsquantity;
Inneitheraught,orinextremity.
Now,whatmyloveis,proofhathmadeyouknow;
Andasmyloveissized,myfearisso:
Whereloveisgreat,thelittlestdoubtsarefear;
Wherelittlefearsgrowgreat,greatlovegrowsthere.
'Faith,Imustleavethee,love,andshortlytoo;
Myoperantpowerstheirfunctionsleavetodo:
Andthoushaltliveinthisfairworldbehind,
Honour'd,beloved;andhaplyoneaskind
Forhusbandshaltthou--
O,confoundtherest!
Suchlovemustneedsbetreasoninmybreast:
Insecondhusbandletmebeaccurst!
Nonewedthesecondbutwhokill'dthefirst.
<STAGEDIR>Aside</STAGEDIR>Wormwood,wormwood.
Theinstancesthatsecondmarriagemove
Arebaserespectsofthrift,butnoneoflove:
AsecondtimeIkillmyhusbanddead,
Whensecondhusbandkissesmeinbed.
Idobelieveyouthinkwhatnowyouspeak;
Butwhatwedodetermineoftwebreak.
Purposeisbuttheslavetomemory,
Ofviolentbirth,butpoorvalidity;
Whichnow,likefruitunripe,sticksonthetree;
Butfall,unshaken,whentheymellowbe.
Mostnecessary'tisthatweforget
Topayourselveswhattoourselvesisdebt:
Whattoourselvesinpassionwepropose,
Thepassionending,doththepurposelose.
Theviolenceofeithergrieforjoy
Theirownenactureswiththemselvesdestroy:
Wherejoymostrevels,griefdothmostlament;
Griefjoys,joygrieves,onslenderaccident.
Thisworldisnotforaye,nor'tisnotstrange
Thatevenourlovesshouldwithourfortuneschange;
For'tisaquestionleftusyettoprove,
Whetherloveleadfortune,orelsefortunelove.
Thegreatmandown,youmarkhisfavouriteflies;
Thepooradvancedmakesfriendsofenemies.
Andhithertodothloveonfortunetend;
Forwhonotneedsshallneverlackafriend,
Andwhoinwantahollowfrienddothtry,
Directlyseasonshimhisenemy.
But,orderlytoendwhereIbegun,
Ourwillsandfatesdosocontraryrun
Thatourdevicesstillareoverthrown;
Ourthoughtsareours,theirendsnoneofourown:
Sothinkthouwiltnosecondhusbandwed;
Butdiethythoughtswhenthyfirstlordisdead.
Norearthtomegivefood,norheavenlight!
Sportandreposelockfrommedayandnight!
Todesperationturnmytrustandhope!
Ananchor'scheerinprisonbemyscope!
Eachoppositethatblanksthefaceofjoy
MeetwhatIwouldhavewellanditdestroy!
Bothhereandhencepursuemelastingstrife,
If,onceawidow,everIbewife!
Ifsheshouldbreakitnow!
'Tisdeeplysworn.Sweet,leavemehereawhile;
Myspiritsgrowdull,andfainIwouldbeguile
Thetediousdaywithsleep.
Sleeprockthybrain,
Andnevercomemischancebetweenustwain!
Madam,howlikeyouthisplay?
Theladyproteststoomuch,methinks.
O,butshe'llkeepherword.
Haveyouheardtheargument?Istherenooffencein't?
No,no,theydobutjest,poisoninjest;nooffence
i'theworld.
Whatdoyoucalltheplay?
TheMouse-trap.Marry,how?Tropically.Thisplay
istheimageofamurderdoneinVienna:Gonzagois
theduke'sname;hiswife,Baptista:youshallsee
anon;'tisaknavishpieceofwork:butwhato'
that?yourmajestyandwethathavefreesouls,it
touchesusnot:letthegalledjadewince,our
withersareunwrung.
ThisisoneLucianus,nephewtotheking.
Youareasgoodasachorus,mylord.
Icouldinterpretbetweenyouandyourlove,ifI
couldseethepuppetsdallying.
Youarekeen,mylord,youarekeen.
Itwouldcostyouagroaningtotakeoffmyedge.
Stillbetter,andworse.
Soyoumusttakeyourhusbands.Begin,murderer;
pox,leavethydamnablefaces,andbegin.Come:
'thecroakingravendothbellowforrevenge.'
Thoughtsblack,handsapt,drugsfit,andtimeagreeing;
Confederateseason,elsenocreatureseeing;
Thoumixturerank,ofmidnightweedscollected,
WithHecate'sbanthriceblasted,thriceinfected,
Thynaturalmagicanddireproperty,
Onwholesomelifeusurpimmediately.
Hepoisonshimi'thegardenfor'sestate.His
name'sGonzago:thestoryisextant,andwritin
choiceItalian:youshallseeanonhowthemurderer
getstheloveofGonzago'swife.
Thekingrises.
What,frightedwithfalsefire!
Howfaresmylord?
Giveo'ertheplay.
Givemesomelight:away!
Lights,lights,lights!
Why,letthestrickendeergoweep,
Thehartungalledplay;
Forsomemustwatch,whilesomemustsleep:
Sorunstheworldaway.
Wouldnotthis,sir,andaforestoffeathers--if
therestofmyfortunesturnTurkwithme--withtwo
Provincialrosesonmyrazedshoes,getmea
fellowshipinacryofplayers,sir?
Halfashare.
Awholeone,I.
Forthoudostknow,ODamondear,
Thisrealmdismantledwas
OfJovehimself;andnowreignshere
Avery,very--pajock.
Youmighthaverhymed.
OgoodHoratio,I'lltaketheghost'swordfora
thousandpound.Didstperceive?
Verywell,mylord.
Uponthetalkofthepoisoning?
Ididverywellnotehim.
Ah,ha!Come,somemusic!come,therecorders!
Forifthekinglikenotthecomedy,
Whythen,belike,helikesitnot,perdy.
Come,somemusic!
Goodmylord,vouchsafemeawordwithyou.
Sir,awholehistory.
Theking,sir,--
Ay,sir,whatofhim?
Isinhisretirementmarvellousdistempered.
Withdrink,sir?
No,mylord,ratherwithcholer.
Yourwisdomshouldshowitselfmorericherto
signifythistohisdoctor;for,formetoputhim
tohispurgationwouldperhapsplungehimintofar
morecholer.
Goodmylord,putyourdiscourseintosomeframeand
startnotsowildlyfrommyaffair.
Iamtame,sir:pronounce.
Thequeen,yourmother,inmostgreatafflictionof
spirit,hathsentmetoyou.
Youarewelcome.
Nay,goodmylord,thiscourtesyisnotoftheright
breed.Ifitshallpleaseyoutomakemea
wholesomeanswer,Iwilldoyourmother's
commandment:ifnot,yourpardonandmyreturn
shallbetheendofmybusiness.
Sir,Icannot.
What,mylord?
Makeyouawholesomeanswer;mywit'sdiseased:but,
sir,suchanswerasIcanmake,youshallcommand;
or,rather,asyousay,mymother:thereforeno
more,buttothematter:mymother,yousay,--
Thenthusshesays;yourbehaviorhathstruckher
intoamazementandadmiration.
Owonderfulson,thatcansoastonishamother!But
istherenosequelattheheelsofthismother's
admiration?Impart.
Shedesirestospeakwithyouinhercloset,ereyou
gotobed.
Weshallobey,wereshetentimesourmother.Have
youanyfurthertradewithus?
Mylord,youoncedidloveme.
SoIdostill,bythesepickersandstealers.
Goodmylord,whatisyourcauseofdistemper?you
do,surely,barthedooruponyourownliberty,if
youdenyyourgriefstoyourfriend.
Sir,Ilackadvancement.
Howcanthatbe,whenyouhavethevoiceoftheking
himselfforyoursuccessioninDenmark?
Ay,butsir,'Whilethegrassgrows,'--theproverb
issomethingmusty.
O,therecorders!letmeseeone.Towithdrawwith
you:--whydoyougoabouttorecoverthewindofme,
asifyouwoulddrivemeintoatoil?
O,mylord,ifmydutybetoobold,myloveistoo
unmannerly.
Idonotwellunderstandthat.Willyouplayupon
thispipe?
Mylord,Icannot.
Iprayyou.
Believeme,Icannot.
Idobeseechyou.
Iknownotouchofit,mylord.
'Tisaseasyaslying:governtheseventageswith
yourlingersandthumb,giveitbreathwithyour
mouth,anditwilldiscoursemosteloquentmusic.
Lookyou,thesearethestops.
ButthesecannotIcommandtoanyutteranceof
harmony;Ihavenottheskill.
Why,lookyounow,howunworthyathingyoumakeof
me!Youwouldplayuponme;youwouldseemtoknow
mystops;youwouldpluckouttheheartofmy
mystery;youwouldsoundmefrommylowestnoteto
thetopofmycompass:andthereismuchmusic,
excellentvoice,inthislittleorgan;yetcannot
youmakeitspeak.'Sblood,doyouthinkIam
easiertobeplayedonthanapipe?Callmewhat
instrumentyouwill,thoughyoucanfretme,yetyou
cannotplayuponme.
Godblessyou,sir!
Mylord,thequeenwouldspeakwithyou,and
presently.
Doyouseeyondercloudthat'salmostinshapeofacamel?
Bythemass,and'tislikeacamel,indeed.
Methinksitislikeaweasel.
Itisbackedlikeaweasel.
Orlikeawhale?
Verylikeawhale.
ThenIwillcometomymotherbyandby.Theyfool
metothetopofmybent.Iwillcomebyandby.
Iwillsayso.
Byandbyiseasilysaid.
Leaveme,friends.
Tisnowtheverywitchingtimeofnight,
Whenchurchyardsyawnandhellitselfbreathesout
Contagiontothisworld:nowcouldIdrinkhotblood,
Anddosuchbitterbusinessastheday
Wouldquaketolookon.Soft!nowtomymother.
Oheart,losenotthynature;letnotever
ThesoulofNeroenterthisfirmbosom:
Letmebecruel,notunnatural:
Iwillspeakdaggerstoher,butusenone;
Mytongueandsoulinthisbehypocrites;
Howinmywordssoevershebeshent,
Togivethemsealsnever,mysoul,consent!
Ilikehimnot,norstandsitsafewithus
Tolethismadnessrange.Thereforeprepareyou;
Iyourcommissionwillforthwithdispatch,
AndhetoEnglandshallalongwithyou:
Thetermsofourestatemaynotendure
Hazardsodangerousasdothhourlygrow
Outofhislunacies.
Wewillourselvesprovide:
Mostholyandreligiousfearitis
Tokeepthosemanymanybodiessafe
Thatliveandfeeduponyourmajesty.
Thesingleandpeculiarlifeisbound,
Withallthestrengthandarmourofthemind,
Tokeepitselffromnoyance;butmuchmore
Thatspirituponwhosewealdependandrest
Thelivesofmany.Theceaseofmajesty
Diesnotalone;but,likeagulf,dothdraw
What'snearitwithit:itisamassywheel,
Fix'donthesummitofthehighestmount,
Towhosehugespokestenthousandlesserthings
Aremortisedandadjoin'd;which,whenitfalls,
Eachsmallannexment,pettyconsequence,
Attendstheboisterousruin.Neveralone
Didthekingsigh,butwithageneralgroan.
Armyou,Iprayyou,tothisspeedyvoyage;
Forwewillfettersputuponthisfear,
Whichnowgoestoofree-footed.
Wewillhasteus.
Mylord,he'sgoingtohismother'scloset:
BehindthearrasI'llconveymyself,
Toheartheprocess;andwarrantshe'lltaxhimhome:
And,asyousaid,andwiselywasitsaid,
'Tismeetthatsomemoreaudiencethanamother,
Sincenaturemakesthempartial,shouldo'erhear
Thespeech,ofvantage.Fareyouwell,myliege:
I'llcalluponyouereyougotobed,
AndtellyouwhatIknow.
Thanks,dearmylord.
O,myoffenceisrankitsmellstoheaven;
Ithaththeprimaleldestcurseupon't,
Abrother'smurder.PraycanInot,
Thoughinclinationbeassharpaswill:
Mystrongerguiltdefeatsmystrongintent;
And,likeamantodoublebusinessbound,
IstandinpausewhereIshallfirstbegin,
Andbothneglect.Whatifthiscursedhand
Werethickerthanitselfwithbrother'sblood,
Istherenotrainenoughinthesweetheavens
Towashitwhiteassnow?Wheretoservesmercy
Buttoconfrontthevisageofoffence?
Andwhat'sinprayerbutthistwo-foldforce,
Tobeforestallederewecometofall,
Orpardon'dbeingdown?ThenI'lllookup;
Myfaultispast.But,O,whatformofprayer
Canservemyturn?'Forgivememyfoulmurder'?
Thatcannotbe;sinceIamstillpossess'd
OfthoseeffectsforwhichIdidthemurder,
Mycrown,mineownambitionandmyqueen.
Mayonebepardon'dandretaintheoffence?
Inthecorruptedcurrentsofthisworld
Offence'sgildedhandmayshovebyjustice,
Andoft'tisseenthewickedprizeitself
Buysoutthelaw:but'tisnotsoabove;
Thereisnoshuffling,theretheactionlies
Inhistruenature;andweourselvescompell'd,
Eventotheteethandforeheadofourfaults,
Togiveinevidence.Whatthen?whatrests?
Trywhatrepentancecan:whatcanitnot?
Yetwhatcanitwhenonecannotrepent?
Owretchedstate!Obosomblackasdeath!
Olimedsoul,that,strugglingtobefree,
Artmoreengaged!Help,angels!Makeassay!
Bow,stubbornknees;and,heartwithstringsofsteel,
Besoftassinewsofthenewbornbabe!
Allmaybewell.
NowmightIdoitpat,nowheispraying;
AndnowI'lldo't.Andsohegoestoheaven;
AndsoamIrevenged.Thatwouldbescann'd:
Avillainkillsmyfather;andforthat,
I,hissoleson,dothissamevillainsend
Toheaven.
O,thisishireandsalary,notrevenge.
Hetookmyfathergrossly,fullofbread;
Withallhiscrimesbroadblown,asflushasMay;
Andhowhisauditstandswhoknowssaveheaven?
Butinourcircumstanceandcourseofthought,
'Tisheavywithhim:andamIthenrevenged,
Totakehiminthepurgingofhissoul,
Whenheisfitandseason'dforhispassage?
No!
Up,sword;andknowthouamorehorridhent:
Whenheisdrunkasleep,orinhisrage,
Orintheincestuouspleasureofhisbed;
Atgaming,swearing,oraboutsomeact
Thathasnorelishofsalvationin't;
Thentriphim,thathisheelsmaykickatheaven,
Andthathissoulmaybeasdamn'dandblack
Ashell,wheretoitgoes.Mymotherstays:
Thisphysicbutprolongsthysicklydays.
<STAGEDIR>Rising</STAGEDIR>Mywordsflyup,mythoughtsremainbelow:
Wordswithoutthoughtsnevertoheavengo.
Hewillcomestraight.Lookyoulayhometohim:
Tellhimhisprankshavebeentoobroadtobearwith,
Andthatyourgracehathscreen'dandstoodbetween
Muchheatandhim.I'llsconcemeevenhere.
Prayyou,beroundwithhim.
<STAGEDIR>Within</STAGEDIR>Mother,mother,mother!
I'llwarrantyou,
Fearmenot:withdraw,Ihearhimcoming.
Now,mother,what'sthematter?
Hamlet,thouhastthyfathermuchoffended.
Mother,youhavemyfathermuchoffended.
Come,come,youanswerwithanidletongue.
Go,go,youquestionwithawickedtongue.
Why,hownow,Hamlet!
What'sthematternow?
Haveyouforgotme?
No,bytherood,notso:
Youarethequeen,yourhusband'sbrother'swife;
And--woulditwerenotso!--youaremymother.
Nay,then,I'llsetthosetoyouthatcanspeak.
Come,come,andsityoudown;youshallnotbudge;
YougonottillIsetyouupaglass
Whereyoumayseetheinmostpartofyou.
Whatwiltthoudo?thouwiltnotmurderme?
Help,help,ho!
<STAGEDIR>Behind</STAGEDIR>What,ho!help,help,help!
<STAGEDIR>Drawing</STAGEDIR>Hownow!arat?Dead,foraducat,dead!
<STAGEDIR>Behind</STAGEDIR>O,Iamslain!
Ome,whathastthoudone?
Nay,Iknownot:
Isittheking?
O,whatarashandbloodydeedisthis!
Abloodydeed!almostasbad,goodmother,
Askillaking,andmarrywithhisbrother.
Askillaking!
Ay,lady,'twasmyword.
Thouwretched,rash,intrudingfool,farewell!
Itooktheeforthybetter:takethyfortune;
Thoufind'sttobetoobusyissomedanger.
Leavewringingofyourhands:peace!sityoudown,
Andletmewringyourheart;forsoIshall,
Ifitbemadeofpenetrablestuff,
Ifdamnedcustomhavenotbrass'ditso
Thatitisproofandbulwarkagainstsense.
WhathaveIdone,thatthoudarestwagthytongue
Innoisesorudeagainstme?
Suchanact
Thatblursthegraceandblushofmodesty,
Callsvirtuehypocrite,takesofftherose
Fromthefairforeheadofaninnocentlove
Andsetsablisterthere,makesmarriage-vows
Asfalseasdicers'oaths:O,suchadeed
Asfromthebodyofcontractionplucks
Theverysoul,andsweetreligionmakes
Arhapsodyofwords:heaven'sfacedothglow:
Yea,thissolidityandcompoundmass,
Withtristfulvisage,asagainstthedoom,
Isthought-sickattheact.
Ayme,whatact,
Thatroarssoloud,andthundersintheindex?
Lookhere,uponthispicture,andonthis,
Thecounterfeitpresentmentoftwobrothers.
See,whatagracewasseatedonthisbrow;
Hyperion'scurls;thefrontofJovehimself;
AneyelikeMars,tothreatenandcommand;
AstationliketheheraldMercury
New-lightedonaheaven-kissinghill;
Acombinationandaformindeed,
Whereeverygoddidseemtosethisseal,
Togivetheworldassuranceofaman:
Thiswasyourhusband.Lookyounow,whatfollows:
Hereisyourhusband;likeamildew'dear,
Blastinghiswholesomebrother.Haveyoueyes?
Couldyouonthisfairmountainleavetofeed,
Andbattenonthismoor?Ha!haveyoueyes?
Youcannotcallitlove;foratyourage
Thehey-dayinthebloodistame,it'shumble,
Andwaitsuponthejudgment:andwhatjudgment
Wouldstepfromthistothis?Sense,sure,youhave,
Elsecouldyounothavemotion;butsure,thatsense
Isapoplex'd;formadnesswouldnoterr,
Norsensetoecstasywasne'ersothrall'd
Butitreservedsomequantityofchoice,
Toserveinsuchadifference.Whatdevilwas't
Thatthushathcozen'dyouathoodman-blind?
Eyeswithoutfeeling,feelingwithoutsight,
Earswithouthandsoreyes,smellingsansall,
Orbutasicklypartofonetruesense
Couldnotsomope.
Oshame!whereisthyblush?Rebellioushell,
Ifthoucanstmutineinamatron'sbones,
Toflamingyouthletvirtuebeaswax,
Andmeltinherownfire:proclaimnoshame
Whenthecompulsiveardourgivesthecharge,
Sincefrostitselfasactivelydothburn
Andreasonpanderswill.
OHamlet,speaknomore:
Thouturn'stmineeyesintomyverysoul;
AndthereIseesuchblackandgrainedspots
Aswillnotleavetheirtinct.
Nay,buttolive
Intheranksweatofanenseamedbed,
Stew'dincorruption,honeyingandmakinglove
Overthenastysty,--
O,speaktomenomore;
Thesewords,likedaggers,enterinmineears;
Nomore,sweetHamlet!
Amurdererandavillain;
Aslavethatisnottwentiethpartthetithe
Ofyourprecedentlord;aviceofkings;
Acutpurseoftheempireandtherule,
Thatfromashelfthepreciousdiademstole,
Andputitinhispocket!
Nomore!
Akingofshredsandpatches,--
Saveme,andhovero'ermewithyourwings,
Youheavenlyguards!Whatwouldyourgraciousfigure?
Alas,he'smad!
Doyounotcomeyourtardysontochide,
That,lapsedintimeandpassion,letsgoby
Theimportantactingofyourdreadcommand?O,say!
Donotforget:thisvisitation
Isbuttowhetthyalmostbluntedpurpose.
But,look,amazementonthymothersits:
O,stepbetweenherandherfightingsoul:
Conceitinweakestbodiesstrongestworks:
Speaktoher,Hamlet.
Howisitwithyou,lady?
Alas,howis'twithyou,
Thatyoudobendyoureyeonvacancy
Andwiththeincorporalairdoholddiscourse?
Forthatyoureyesyourspiritswildlypeep;
And,asthesleepingsoldiersinthealarm,
Yourbeddedhair,likelifeinexcrements,
Startsup,andstandsonend.Ogentleson,
Upontheheatandflameofthydistemper
Sprinklecoolpatience.Whereondoyoulook?
Onhim,onhim!Lookyou,howpaleheglares!
Hisformandcauseconjoin'd,preachingtostones,
Wouldmakethemcapable.Donotlookuponme;
Lestwiththispiteousactionyouconvert
Mysterneffects:thenwhatIhavetodo
Willwanttruecolour;tearsperchanceforblood.
Towhomdoyouspeakthis?
Doyouseenothingthere?
Nothingatall;yetallthatisIsee.
Nordidyounothinghear?
No,nothingbutourselves.
Why,lookyouthere!look,howitstealsaway!
Myfather,inhishabitashelived!
Look,wherehegoes,evennow,outattheportal!
Thistheverycoinageofyourbrain:
Thisbodilesscreationecstasy
Isverycunningin.
Ecstasy!
Mypulse,asyours,dothtemperatelykeeptime,
Andmakesashealthfulmusic:itisnotmadness
ThatIhaveutter'd:bringmetothetest,
AndIthematterwillre-word;whichmadness
Wouldgambolfrom.Mother,forloveofgrace,
Laynotthatmatteringunctiontoyoursoul,
Thatnotyourtrespass,butmymadnessspeaks:
Itwillbutskinandfilmtheulcerousplace,
Whilstrankcorruption,miningallwithin,
Infectsunseen.Confessyourselftoheaven;
Repentwhat'spast;avoidwhatistocome;
Anddonotspreadthecompostontheweeds,
Tomakethemranker.Forgivemethismyvirtue;
Forinthefatnessofthesepursytimes
Virtueitselfofvicemustpardonbeg,
Yea,curbandwooforleavetodohimgood.
OHamlet,thouhastcleftmyheartintwain.
O,throwawaytheworserpartofit,
Andlivethepurerwiththeotherhalf.
Goodnight:butgonottomineuncle'sbed;
Assumeavirtue,ifyouhaveitnot.
Thatmonster,custom,whoallsensedotheat,
Ofhabitsdevil,isangelyetinthis,
Thattotheuseofactionsfairandgood
Helikewisegivesafrockorlivery,
Thataptlyisputon.Refrainto-night,
Andthatshalllendakindofeasiness
Tothenextabstinence:thenextmoreeasy;
Forusealmostcanchangethestampofnature,
Andeither...thedevil,orthrowhimout
Withwondrouspotency.Oncemore,goodnight:
Andwhenyouaredesiroustobebless'd,
I'llblessingbegofyou.Forthissamelord,
Idorepent:butheavenhathpleaseditso,
Topunishmewiththisandthiswithme,
ThatImustbetheirscourgeandminister.
Iwillbestowhim,andwillanswerwell
ThedeathIgavehim.So,again,goodnight.
Imustbecruel,onlytobekind:
Thusbadbeginsandworseremainsbehind.
Onewordmore,goodlady.
WhatshallIdo?
Notthis,bynomeans,thatIbidyoudo:
Letthebloatkingtemptyouagaintobed;
Pinchwantononyourcheek;callyouhismouse;
Andlethim,forapairofreechykisses,
Orpaddlinginyourneckwithhisdamn'dfingers,
Makeyoutoravelallthismatterout,
ThatIessentiallyamnotinmadness,
Butmadincraft.'Tweregoodyoulethimknow;
Forwho,that'sbutaqueen,fair,sober,wise,
Wouldfromapaddock,fromabat,agib,
Suchdearconcerningshide?whowoulddoso?
No,indespiteofsenseandsecrecy,
Unpegthebasketonthehouse'stop.
Letthebirdsfly,and,likethefamousape,
Totryconclusions,inthebasketcreep,
Andbreakyourownneckdown.
Bethouassured,ifwordsbemadeofbreath,
Andbreathoflife,Ihavenolifetobreathe
Whatthouhastsaidtome.
ImusttoEngland;youknowthat?
Alack,
Ihadforgot:'tissoconcludedon.
There'slettersseal'd:andmytwoschoolfellows,
WhomIwilltrustasIwilladdersfang'd,
Theybearthemandate;theymustsweepmyway,
Andmarshalmetoknavery.Letitwork;
For'tisthesporttohavetheengineer
Hoistwithhisownpetard:and'tshallgohard
ButIwilldelveoneyardbelowtheirmines,
Andblowthematthemoon:O,'tismostsweet,
Wheninonelinetwocraftsdirectlymeet.
Thismanshallsetmepacking:
I'lllugthegutsintotheneighbourroom.
Mother,goodnight.Indeedthiscounsellor
Isnowmoststill,mostsecretandmostgrave,
Whowasinlifeafoolishpratingknave.
Come,sir,todrawtowardanendwithyou.
Goodnight,mother.
There'smatterinthesesighs,theseprofoundheaves:
Youmusttranslate:'tisfitweunderstandthem.
Whereisyourson?
Bestowthisplaceonusalittlewhile.
Ah,mygoodlord,whathaveIseento-night!
What,Gertrude?HowdoesHamlet?
Madastheseaandwind,whenbothcontend
Whichisthemightier:inhislawlessfit,
Behindthearrashearingsomethingstir,
Whipsouthisrapier,cries,'Arat,arat!'
And,inthisbrainishapprehension,kills
Theunseengoodoldman.
Oheavydeed!
Ithadbeensowithus,hadwebeenthere:
Hislibertyisfullofthreatstoall;
Toyouyourself,tous,toeveryone.
Alas,howshallthisbloodydeedbeanswer'd?
Itwillbelaidtous,whoseprovidence
Shouldhavekeptshort,restrain'dandoutofhaunt,
Thismadyoungman:butsomuchwasourlove,
Wewouldnotunderstandwhatwasmostfit;
But,liketheownerofafouldisease,
Tokeepitfromdivulging,letitfeed
EvenonthepithofLife.Whereishegone?
Todrawapartthebodyhehathkill'd:
O'erwhomhisverymadness,likesomeore
Amongamineralofmetalsbase,
Showsitselfpure;heweepsforwhatisdone.
OGertrude,comeaway!
Thesunnosoonershallthemountainstouch,
Butwewillshiphimhence:andthisviledeed
Wemust,withallourmajestyandskill,
Bothcountenanceandexcuse.Ho,Guildenstern!
Friendsboth,gojoinyouwithsomefurtheraid:
HamletinmadnesshathPoloniusslain,
Andfromhismother'sclosethathhedragg'dhim:
Goseekhimout;speakfair,andbringthebody
Intothechapel.Iprayyou,hasteinthis.
Come,Gertrude,we'llcallupourwisestfriends;
Andletthemknow,bothwhatwemeantodo,
Andwhat'suntimelydone...
Whosewhispero'ertheworld'sdiameter,
Aslevelasthecannontohisblank,
Transportshispoison'dshot,maymissourname,
Andhitthewoundlessair.O,comeaway!
Mysoulisfullofdiscordanddismay.
Safelystowed.
<STAGEDIR>Within</STAGEDIR>Hamlet!LordHamlet!
Whatnoise?whocallsonHamlet?
O,heretheycome.
Whathaveyoudone,mylord,withthedeadbody?
Compoundeditwithdust,whereto'tiskin.
Telluswhere'tis,thatwemaytakeitthence
Andbearittothechapel.
Donotbelieveit.
Believewhat?
ThatIcankeepyourcounselandnotmineown.
Besides,tobedemandedofasponge!what
replicationshouldbemadebythesonofaking?
Takeyoumeforasponge,mylord?
Ay,sir,thatsoaksuptheking'scountenance,his
rewards,hisauthorities.Butsuchofficersdothe
kingbestserviceintheend:hekeepsthem,like
anape,inthecornerofhisjaw;firstmouthed,to
belastswallowed:whenheneedswhatyouhave
gleaned,itisbutsqueezingyou,and,sponge,you
shallbedryagain.
Iunderstandyounot,mylord.
Iamgladofit:aknavishspeechsleepsina
foolishear.
Mylord,youmusttelluswherethebodyis,andgo
withustotheking.
Thebodyiswiththeking,butthekingisnotwith
thebody.Thekingisathing--
Athing,mylord!
Ofnothing:bringmetohim.Hidefox,andallafter.
Ihavesenttoseekhim,andtofindthebody.
Howdangerousisitthatthismangoesloose!
Yetmustnotweputthestronglawonhim:
He'slovedofthedistractedmultitude,
Wholikenotintheirjudgment,buttheireyes;
Andwheretisso,theoffender'sscourgeisweigh'd,
Butnevertheoffence.Tobearallsmoothandeven,
Thissuddensendinghimawaymustseem
Deliberatepause:diseasesdesperategrown
Bydesperateappliancearerelieved,
Ornotatall.
Hownow!whathathbefall'n?
Wherethedeadbodyisbestow'd,mylord,
Wecannotgetfromhim.
Butwhereishe?
Without,mylord;guarded,toknowyourpleasure.
Bringhimbeforeus.
Ho,Guildenstern!bringinmylord.
Now,Hamlet,where'sPolonius?
Atsupper.
Atsupper!where?
Notwhereheeats,butwhereheiseaten:acertain
convocationofpoliticwormsaree'enathim.Your
wormisyouronlyemperorfordiet:wefatall
creatureselsetofatus,andwefatourselvesfor
maggots:yourfatkingandyourleanbeggarisbut
variableservice,twodishes,buttoonetable:
that'stheend.
Alas,alas!
Amanmayfishwiththewormthathatheatofa
king,andcatofthefishthathathfedofthatworm.
Whatdostyoumeanbythis?
Nothingbuttoshowyouhowakingmaygoa
progressthroughthegutsofabeggar.
WhereisPolonius?
Inheaven;sendhithertosee:ifyourmessenger
findhimnotthere,seekhimi'theotherplace
yourself.Butindeed,ifyoufindhimnotwithin
thismonth,youshallnosehimasyougoupthe
stairsintothelobby.
Goseekhimthere.
Hewillstaytillyecome.
Hamlet,thisdeed,forthineespecialsafety,--
Whichwedotender,aswedearlygrieve
Forthatwhichthouhastdone,--mustsendtheehence
Withfieryquickness:thereforepreparethyself;
Thebarkisready,andthewindathelp,
Theassociatestend,andeverythingisbent
ForEngland.
ForEngland!
Ay,Hamlet.
Good.
Soisit,ifthouknew'stourpurposes.
Iseeacherubthatseesthem.But,come;for
England!Farewell,dearmother.
Thylovingfather,Hamlet.
Mymother:fatherandmotherismanandwife;man
andwifeisoneflesh;andso,mymother.Come,forEngland!
Followhimatfoot;tempthimwithspeedaboard;
Delayitnot;I'llhavehimhenceto-night:
Away!foreverythingisseal'danddone
Thatelseleansontheaffair:prayyou,makehaste.
And,England,ifmylovethouhold'stataught--
Asmygreatpowerthereofmaygivetheesense,
Sinceyetthycicatricelooksrawandred
AftertheDanishsword,andthyfreeawe
Payshomagetous--thoumaystnotcoldlyset
Oursovereignprocess;whichimportsatfull,
Byletterscongruingtothateffect,
ThepresentdeathofHamlet.Doit,England;
Forlikethehecticinmybloodherages,
Andthoumustcureme:tillIknow'tisdone,
Howe'ermyhaps,myjoyswerene'erbegun.
Go,captain,frommegreettheDanishking;
Tellhimthat,byhislicence,Fortinbras
Cravestheconveyanceofapromisedmarch
Overhiskingdom.Youknowtherendezvous.
Ifthathismajestywouldaughtwithus,
Weshallexpressourdutyinhiseye;
Andlethimknowso.
Iwilldo't,mylord.
Gosoftlyon.
Goodsir,whosepowersarethese?
TheyareofNorway,sir.
Howpurposed,sir,Iprayyou?
AgainstsomepartofPoland.
Whocommandsthem,sir?
ThenephewstooldNorway,Fortinbras.
GoesitagainstthemainofPoland,sir,
Orforsomefrontier?
Trulytospeak,andwithnoaddition,
Wegotogainalittlepatchofground
Thathathinitnoprofitbutthename.
Topayfiveducats,five,Iwouldnotfarmit;
NorwillityieldtoNorwayorthePole
Arankerrate,shoulditbesoldinfee.
Why,thenthePolackneverwilldefendit.
Yes,itisalreadygarrison'd.
Twothousandsoulsandtwentythousandducats
Willnotdebatethequestionofthisstraw:
Thisistheimposthumeofmuchwealthandpeace,
Thatinwardbreaks,andshowsnocausewithout
Whythemandies.Ihumblythankyou,sir.
Godbewi'you,sir.
Wiltpleaseyougo,mylord?
I'llbewithyoustraightgoalittlebefore.
Howalloccasionsdoinformagainstme,
Andspurmydullrevenge!Whatisaman,
Ifhischiefgoodandmarketofhistime
Bebuttosleepandfeed?abeast,nomore.
Sure,hethatmadeuswithsuchlargediscourse,
Lookingbeforeandafter,gaveusnot
Thatcapabilityandgod-likereason
Tofustinusunused.Now,whetheritbe
Bestialoblivion,orsomecravenscruple
Ofthinkingtoopreciselyontheevent,
Athoughtwhich,quarter'd,hathbutonepartwisdom
Andeverthreepartscoward,Idonotknow
WhyyetIlivetosay'Thisthing'stodo;'
SithIhavecauseandwillandstrengthandmeans
Todo't.Examplesgrossasearthexhortme:
Witnessthisarmyofsuchmassandcharge
Ledbyadelicateandtenderprince,
Whosespiritwithdivineambitionpuff'd
Makesmouthsattheinvisibleevent,
Exposingwhatismortalandunsure
Toallthatfortune,deathanddangerdare,
Evenforanegg-shell.Rightlytobegreat
Isnottostirwithoutgreatargument,
Butgreatlytofindquarrelinastraw
Whenhonour'satthestake.HowstandIthen,
Thathaveafatherkill'd,amotherstain'd,
Excitementsofmyreasonandmyblood,
Andletallsleep?while,tomyshame,Isee
Theimminentdeathoftwentythousandmen,
That,forafantasyandtrickoffame,
Gototheirgraveslikebeds,fightforaplot
Whereonthenumberscannottrythecause,
Whichisnottombenoughandcontinent
Tohidetheslain?O,fromthistimeforth,
Mythoughtsbebloody,orbenothingworth!
Iwillnotspeakwithher.
Sheisimportunate,indeeddistract:
Hermoodwillneedsbepitied.
Whatwouldshehave?
Shespeaksmuchofherfather;saysshehears
There'stricksi'theworld;andhems,andbeatsherheart;
Spurnsenviouslyatstraws;speaksthingsindoubt,
Thatcarrybuthalfsense:herspeechisnothing,
Yettheunshapeduseofitdothmove
Thehearerstocollection;theyaimatit,
Andbotchthewordsupfittotheirownthoughts;
Which,asherwinks,andnods,andgestures
yieldthem,
Indeedwouldmakeonethinktheremightbethought,
Thoughnothingsure,yetmuchunhappily.
'Tweregoodshewerespokenwith;forshemaystrew
Dangerousconjecturesinill-breedingminds.
Lethercomein.
Tomysicksoul,assin'struenatureis,
Eachtoyseemsprologuetosomegreatamiss:
Sofullofartlessjealousyisguilt,
Itspillsitselfinfearingtobespilt.
WhereisthebeauteousmajestyofDenmark?
Hownow,Ophelia!
<STAGEDIR>Sings</STAGEDIR>
HowshouldIyourtrueloveknow
Fromanotherone?
Byhiscocklehatandstaff,
Andhissandalshoon.
Alas,sweetlady,whatimportsthissong?
Sayyou?nay,prayyou,mark.
Heisdeadandgone,lady,
Heisdeadandgone;
Athisheadagrass-greenturf,
Athisheelsastone.
Nay,but,Ophelia,--
Prayyou,mark.
Whitehisshroudasthemountainsnow,--
Alas,lookhere,mylord.
<STAGEDIR>Sings</STAGEDIR>
Lardedwithsweetflowers
Whichbewepttothegravedidgo
Withtrue-loveshowers.
Howdoyou,prettylady?
Well,God'ildyou!Theysaytheowlwasabaker's
daughter.Lord,weknowwhatweare,butknownot
whatwemaybe.Godbeatyourtable!
Conceituponherfather.
Prayyou,let'shavenowordsofthis;butwhenthey
askyouwhatitmeans,sayyouthis:
To-morrowisSaintValentine'sday,
Allinthemorningbetime,
AndIamaidatyourwindow,
TobeyourValentine.
Thenupherose,anddonn'dhisclothes,
Anddupp'dthechamber-door;
Letinthemaid,thatoutamaid
Neverdepartedmore.
PrettyOphelia!
Indeed,la,withoutanoath,I'llmakeanendon't:
ByGisandbySaintCharity,
Alack,andfieforshame!
Youngmenwilldo't,iftheycometo't;
Bycock,theyaretoblame.
Quothshe,beforeyoutumbledme,
Youpromisedmetowed.
SowouldIha'done,byyondersun,
Anthouhadstnotcometomybed.
Howlonghathshebeenthus?
Ihopeallwillbewell.Wemustbepatient:butI
cannotchoosebutweep,tothinktheyshouldlayhim
i'thecoldground.Mybrothershallknowofit:
andsoIthankyouforyourgoodcounsel.Come,my
coach!Goodnight,ladies;goodnight,sweetladies;
goodnight,goodnight.
Followherclose;givehergoodwatch,
Iprayyou.
O,thisisthepoisonofdeepgrief;itsprings
Allfromherfather'sdeath.OGertrude,Gertrude,
Whensorrowscome,theycomenotsinglespies
Butinbattalions.First,herfatherslain:
Next,yoursongone;andhemostviolentauthor
Ofhisownjustremove:thepeoplemuddied,
Thickandunwholesomeintheirthoughtsandwhispers,
ForgoodPolonius'death;andwehavedonebutgreenly,
Inhugger-muggertointerhim:poorOphelia
Dividedfromherselfandherfairjudgment,
Withoutthewhichwearepictures,ormerebeasts:
Last,andasmuchcontainingasallthese,
HerbrotherisinsecretcomefromFrance;
Feedsonhiswonder,keepshimselfinclouds,
Andwantsnotbuzzerstoinfecthisear
Withpestilentspeechesofhisfather'sdeath;
Whereinnecessity,ofmatterbeggar'd,
Willnothingstickourpersontoarraign
Inearandear.OmydearGertrude,this,
Liketoamurdering-piece,inmanyplaces
Givesmesuperfluousdeath.
Alack,whatnoiseisthis?
WherearemySwitzers?Letthemguardthedoor.
Whatisthematter?
Saveyourself,mylord:
Theocean,overpeeringofhislist,
Eatsnottheflatswithmoreimpetuoushaste
ThanyoungLaertes,inariotoushead,
O'erbearsyourofficers.Therabblecallhimlord;
And,astheworldwerenowbuttobegin,
Antiquityforgot,customnotknown,
Theratifiersandpropsofeveryword,
Theycry'Choosewe:Laertesshallbeking:'
Caps,hands,andtongues,applaudittotheclouds:
'Laertesshallbeking,Laertesking!'
Howcheerfullyonthefalsetrailtheycry!
O,thisiscounter,youfalseDanishdogs!
Thedoorsarebroke.
Whereisthisking?Sirs,standyouallwithout.
No,let'scomein.
Iprayyou,givemeleave.
Wewill,wewill.
Ithankyou:keepthedoor.Othouvileking,
Givememyfather!
Calmly,goodLaertes.
Thatdropofbloodthat'scalmproclaimsmebastard,
Criescuckoldtomyfather,brandstheharlot
Evenhere,betweenthechasteunsmirchedbrow
Ofmytruemother.
Whatisthecause,Laertes,
Thatthyrebellionlookssogiant-like?
Lethimgo,Gertrude;donotfearourperson:
There'ssuchdivinitydothhedgeaking,
Thattreasoncanbutpeeptowhatitwould,
Actslittleofhiswill.Tellme,Laertes,
Whythouartthusincensed.Lethimgo,Gertrude.
Speak,man.
Whereismyfather?
Dead.
Butnotbyhim.
Lethimdemandhisfill.
Howcamehedead?I'llnotbejuggledwith:
Tohell,allegiance!vows,totheblackestdevil!
Conscienceandgrace,totheprofoundestpit!
Idaredamnation.TothispointIstand,
ThatboththeworldsIgivetonegligence,
Letcomewhatcomes;onlyI'llberevenged
Mostthoroughlyformyfather.
Whoshallstayyou?
Mywill,notalltheworld:
Andformymeans,I'llhusbandthemsowell,
Theyshallgofarwithlittle.
GoodLaertes,
Ifyoudesiretoknowthecertainty
Ofyourdearfather'sdeath,is'twritinyourrevenge,
That,swoopstake,youwilldrawbothfriendandfoe,
Winnerandloser?
Nonebuthisenemies.
Willyouknowthemthen?
TohisgoodfriendsthuswideI'llopemyarms;
Andlikethekindlife-renderingpelican,
Repastthemwithmyblood.
Why,nowyouspeak
Likeagoodchildandatruegentleman.
ThatIamguiltlessofyourfather'sdeath,
Andammostsensibleingriefforit,
Itshallasleveltoyourjudgmentpierce
Asdaydoestoyoureye.
<STAGEDIR>Within</STAGEDIR>Lethercomein.
Hownow!whatnoiseisthat?
Oheat,dryupmybrains!tearsseventimessalt,
Burnoutthesenseandvirtueofmineeye!
Byheaven,thymadnessshallbepaidbyweight,
Tillourscaleturnthebeam.OroseofMay!
Dearmaid,kindsister,sweetOphelia!
Oheavens!is'tpossible,ayoungmaid'swits
Shouldbeasmoralasanoldman'slife?
Natureisfineinlove,andwhere'tisfine,
Itsendssomepreciousinstanceofitself
Afterthethingitloves.
<STAGEDIR>Sings</STAGEDIR>
Theyborehimbarefacedonthebier;
Heynonnonny,nonny,heynonny;
Andinhisgraverain'dmanyatear:--
Fareyouwell,mydove!
Hadstthouthywits,anddidstpersuaderevenge,
Itcouldnotmovethus.
<STAGEDIR>Sings</STAGEDIR>
Youmustsinga-downa-down,
Anyoucallhima-down-a.
O,howthewheelbecomesit!Itisthefalse
steward,thatstolehismaster'sdaughter.
Thisnothing'smorethanmatter.
There'srosemary,that'sforremembrance;pray,
love,remember:andthereispansies.that'sforthoughts.
Adocumentinmadness,thoughtsandremembrancefitted.
There'sfennelforyou,andcolumbines:there'srue
foryou;andhere'ssomeforme:wemaycallit
herb-graceo'Sundays:Oyoumustwearyourruewith
adifference.There'sadaisy:Iwouldgiveyou
someviolets,buttheywitheredallwhenmyfather
died:theysayhemadeagoodend,--
ForbonnysweetRobinisallmyjoy.
Thoughtandaffliction,passion,hellitself,
Sheturnstofavourandtoprettiness.
<STAGEDIR>Sings</STAGEDIR>
Andwillhenotcomeagain?
Andwillhenotcomeagain?
No,no,heisdead:
Gotothydeath-bed:
Heneverwillcomeagain.
Hisbeardwasaswhiteassnow,
Allflaxenwashispoll:
Heisgone,heisgone,
Andwecastawaymoan:
Godha'mercyonhissoul!
AndofallChristiansouls,IprayGod.Godbewi'ye.
Doyouseethis,OGod?
Laertes,Imustcommunewithyourgrief,
Oryoudenymeright.Gobutapart,
Makechoiceofwhomyourwisestfriendsyouwill.
Andtheyshallhearandjudge'twixtyouandme:
Ifbydirectorbycollateralhand
Theyfindustouch'd,wewillourkingdomgive,
Ourcrown,ourlife,andallthatwecanours,
Toyouinsatisfaction;butifnot,
Beyoucontenttolendyourpatiencetous,
Andweshalljointlylabourwithyoursoul
Togiveitduecontent.
Letthisbeso;
Hismeansofdeath,hisobscurefuneral--
Notrophy,sword,norhatchmento'erhisbones,
Nonobleritenorformalostentation--
Crytobeheard,as'twerefromheaventoearth,
ThatImustcall'tinquestion.
Soyoushall;
Andwheretheoffenceisletthegreataxefall.
Iprayyou,gowithme.
Whataretheythatwouldspeakwithme?
Sailors,sir:theysaytheyhavelettersforyou.
Letthemcomein.
Idonotknowfromwhatpartoftheworld
Ishouldbegreeted,ifnotfromLordHamlet.
Godblessyou,sir.
Lethimblesstheetoo.
Heshall,sir,an'tpleasehim.There'saletterfor
you,sir;itcomesfromtheambassadorthatwas
boundforEngland;ifyournamebeHoratio,asIam
lettoknowitis.
<STAGEDIR>Reads</STAGEDIR>'Horatio,whenthoushalthaveoverlooked
this,givethesefellowssomemeanstotheking:
theyhavelettersforhim.Ereweweretwodaysold
atsea,apirateofverywarlikeappointmentgaveus
chase.Findingourselvestooslowofsail,weputon
acompelledvalour,andinthegrappleIboarded
them:ontheinstanttheygotclearofourship;so
Ialonebecametheirprisoner.Theyhavedealtwith
melikethievesofmercy:buttheyknewwhatthey
did;Iamtodoagoodturnforthem.Lettheking
havethelettersIhavesent;andrepairthoutome
withasmuchspeedasthouwouldstflydeath.I
havewordstospeakinthineearwillmakethee
dumb;yetaretheymuchtoolightfortheboreof
thematter.Thesegoodfellowswillbringthee
whereIam.RosencrantzandGuildensternholdtheir
courseforEngland:ofthemIhavemuchtotell
thee.Farewell.
'Hethatthouknowestthine,HAMLET.'
Come,Iwillmakeyouwayfortheseyourletters;
Anddo'tthespeedier,thatyoumaydirectme
Tohimfromwhomyoubroughtthem.
Nowmustyourconsciencemyacquaintanceseal,
Andyoumustputmeinyourheartforfriend,
Sithyouhaveheard,andwithaknowingear,
Thathewhichhathyournoblefatherslain
Pursuedmylife.
Itwellappears:buttellme
Whyyouproceedednotagainstthesefeats,
Socrimefulandsocapitalinnature,
Asbyyoursafety,wisdom,allthingselse,
Youmainlywerestirr'dup.
O,fortwospecialreasons;
Whichmaytoyou,perhaps,seemmuchunsinew'd,
Butyettometheyarestrong.Thequeenhismother
Livesalmostbyhislooks;andformyself--
Myvirtueormyplague,beiteitherwhich--
She'ssoconjunctivetomylifeandsoul,
That,asthestarmovesnotbutinhissphere,
Icouldnotbutbyher.Theothermotive,
WhytoapubliccountImightnotgo,
Isthegreatlovethegeneralgenderbearhim;
Who,dippingallhisfaultsintheiraffection,
Would,likethespringthatturnethwoodtostone,
Converthisgyvestograces;sothatmyarrows,
Tooslightlytimber'dforsoloudawind,
Wouldhaverevertedtomybowagain,
AndnotwhereIhadaim'dthem.
AndsohaveIanoblefatherlost;
Asisterdrivenintodesperateterms,
Whoseworth,ifpraisesmaygobackagain,
Stoodchallengeronmountofalltheage
Forherperfections:butmyrevengewillcome.
Breaknotyoursleepsforthat:youmustnotthink
Thatwearemadeofstuffsoflatanddull
Thatwecanletourbeardbeshookwithdanger
Andthinkitpastime.Youshortlyshallhearmore:
Ilovedyourfather,andweloveourself;
Andthat,Ihope,willteachyoutoimagine--
Hownow!whatnews?
Letters,mylord,fromHamlet:
Thistoyourmajesty;thistothequeen.
FromHamlet!whobroughtthem?
Sailors,mylord,theysay;Isawthemnot:
TheyweregivenmebyClaudio;hereceivedthem
Ofhimthatbroughtthem.
Laertes,youshallhearthem.Leaveus.
'Highandmighty,YoushallknowIamsetnakedon
yourkingdom.To-morrowshallIbegleavetosee
yourkinglyeyes:whenIshall,firstaskingyour
pardonthereunto,recounttheoccasionofmysudden
andmorestrangereturn.'HAMLET.'
Whatshouldthismean?Arealltherestcomeback?
Orisitsomeabuse,andnosuchthing?
Knowyouthehand?
'TisHamletscharacter.'Naked!
Andinapostscripthere,hesays'alone.'
Canyouadviseme?
I'mlostinit,mylord.Butlethimcome;
Itwarmstheverysicknessinmyheart,
ThatIshallliveandtellhimtohisteeth,
'Thusdidestthou.'
Ifitbeso,Laertes--
Ashowshoulditbeso?howotherwise?--
Willyouberuledbyme?
Ay,mylord;
Soyouwillnoto'errulemetoapeace.
Tothineownpeace.Ifhebenowreturn'd,
Ascheckingathisvoyage,andthathemeans
Nomoretoundertakeit,Iwillworkhim
Toanexploit,nowripeinmydevice,
Underthewhichheshallnotchoosebutfall:
Andforhisdeathnowindofblameshallbreathe,
Butevenhismothershallunchargethepractise
Andcallitaccident.
Mylord,Iwillberuled;
Therather,ifyoucoulddeviseitso
ThatImightbetheorgan.
Itfallsright.
Youhavebeentalk'dofsinceyourtravelmuch,
AndthatinHamlet'shearing,foraquality
Wherein,theysay,youshine:yoursumofparts
Didnottogetherplucksuchenvyfromhim
Asdidthatone,andthat,inmyregard,
Oftheunworthiestsiege.
Whatpartisthat,mylord?
Averyribandinthecapofyouth,
Yetneedfultoo;foryouthnolessbecomes
Thelightandcarelessliverythatitwears
Thansettledagehissablesandhisweeds,
Importinghealthandgraveness.Twomonthssince,
HerewasagentlemanofNormandy:--
I'veseenmyself,andservedagainst,theFrench,
Andtheycanwellonhorseback:butthisgallant
Hadwitchcraftin't;hegrewuntohisseat;
Andtosuchwondrousdoingbroughthishorse,
Ashehadbeenincorpsedanddemi-natured
Withthebravebeast:sofarhetopp'dmythought,
ThatI,inforgeryofshapesandtricks,
Comeshortofwhathedid.
ANormanwas't?
ANorman.
Uponmylife,Lamond.
Theverysame.
Iknowhimwell:heisthebroochindeed
Andgemofallthenation.
Hemadeconfessionofyou,
Andgaveyousuchamasterlyreport
Forartandexerciseinyourdefence
Andforyourrapiermostespecially,
Thathecriedout,'twouldbeasightindeed,
Ifonecouldmatchyou:thescrimersoftheirnation,
Heswore,hadhadneithermotion,guard,noreye,
Ifyouopposedthem.Sir,thisreportofhis
DidHamletsoenvenomwithhisenvy
Thathecouldnothingdobutwishandbeg
Yoursuddencomingo'er,toplaywithhim.
Now,outofthis,--
Whatoutofthis,mylord?
Laertes,wasyourfatherdeartoyou?
Orareyoulikethepaintingofasorrow,
Afacewithoutaheart?
Whyaskyouthis?
NotthatIthinkyoudidnotloveyourfather;
ButthatIknowloveisbegunbytime;
AndthatIsee,inpassagesofproof,
Timequalifiesthesparkandfireofit.
Thereliveswithintheveryflameoflove
Akindofwickorsnuffthatwillabateit;
Andnothingisatalikegoodnessstill;
Forgoodness,growingtoaplurisy,
Diesinhisowntoomuch:thatwewoulddo
Weshoulddowhenwewould;forthis'would'changes
Andhathabatementsanddelaysasmany
Astherearetongues,arehands,areaccidents;
Andthenthis'should'islikeaspendthriftsigh,
Thathurtsbyeasing.But,tothequicko'theulcer:--
Hamletcomesback:whatwouldyouundertake,
Toshowyourselfyourfather'ssonindeed
Morethaninwords?
Tocuthisthroati'thechurch.
Noplace,indeed,shouldmurdersanctuarize;
Revengeshouldhavenobounds.But,goodLaertes,
Willyoudothis,keepclosewithinyourchamber.
Hamletreturn'dshallknowyouarecomehome:
We'llputonthoseshallpraiseyourexcellence
Andsetadoublevarnishonthefame
TheFrenchmangaveyou,bringyouinfinetogether
Andwageronyourheads:he,beingremiss,
Mostgenerousandfreefromallcontriving,
Willnotperusethefoils;sothat,withease,
Orwithalittleshuffling,youmaychoose
Aswordunbated,andinapassofpractise
Requitehimforyourfather.
Iwilldo't:
And,forthatpurpose,I'llanointmysword.
Iboughtanunctionofamountebank,
Somortalthat,butdipaknifeinit,
Whereitdrawsbloodnocataplasmsorare,
Collectedfromallsimplesthathavevirtue
Underthemoon,cansavethethingfromdeath
Thatisbutscratch'dwithal:I'lltouchmypoint
Withthiscontagion,that,ifIgallhimslightly,
Itmaybedeath.
Let'sfurtherthinkofthis;
Weighwhatconveniencebothoftimeandmeans
Mayfitustoourshape:ifthisshouldfail,
Andthatourdriftlookthroughourbadperformance,
'Twerebetternotassay'd:thereforethisproject
Shouldhaveabackorsecond,thatmighthold,
Ifthisshouldblastinproof.Soft!letmesee:
We'llmakeasolemnwageronyourcunnings:Iha't.
Wheninyourmotionyouarehotanddry--
Asmakeyourboutsmoreviolenttothatend--
Andthathecallsfordrink,I'llhavepreparedhim
Achaliceforthenonce,whereonbutsipping,
Ifhebychanceescapeyourvenom'dstuck,
Ourpurposemayholdthere.
Hownow,sweetqueen!
Onewoedothtreaduponanother'sheel,
Sofasttheyfollow;yoursister'sdrown'd,Laertes.
Drown'd!O,where?
Thereisawillowgrowsaslantabrook,
Thatshowshishoarleavesintheglassystream;
Therewithfantasticgarlandsdidshecome
Ofcrow-flowers,nettles,daisies,andlongpurples
Thatliberalshepherdsgiveagrossername,
Butourcoldmaidsdodeadmen'sfingerscallthem:
There,onthependentboughshercoronetweeds
Clamberingtohang,anenvioussliverbroke;
Whendownherweedytrophiesandherself
Fellintheweepingbrook.Herclothesspreadwide;
And,mermaid-like,awhiletheyboreherup:
Whichtimeshechantedsnatchesofoldtunes;
Asoneincapableofherowndistress,
Orlikeacreaturenativeandindued
Untothatelement:butlongitcouldnotbe
Tillthathergarments,heavywiththeirdrink,
Pull'dthepoorwretchfromhermelodiouslay
Tomuddydeath.
Alas,then,sheisdrown'd?
Drown'd,drown'd.
Toomuchofwaterhastthou,poorOphelia,
AndthereforeIforbidmytears:butyet
Itisourtrick;naturehercustomholds,
Letshamesaywhatitwill:whenthesearegone,
Thewomanwillbeout.Adieu,mylord:
Ihaveaspeechoffire,thatfainwouldblaze,
Butthatthisfollydoutsit.
Let'sfollow,Gertrude:
HowmuchIhadtodotocalmhisrage!
NowfearIthiswillgiveitstartagain;
Thereforelet'sfollow.
IsshetobeburiedinChristianburialthat
wilfullyseeksherownsalvation?
Itelltheesheis:andthereforemakehergrave
straight:thecrownerhathsatonher,andfindsit
Christianburial.
Howcanthatbe,unlessshedrownedherselfinher
owndefence?
Why,'tisfoundso.
Itmustbe'seoffendendo;'itcannotbeelse.For
hereliesthepoint:ifIdrownmyselfwittingly,
itarguesanact:andanacthaththreebranches:it
is,toact,todo,toperform:argal,shedrowned
herselfwittingly.
Nay,buthearyou,goodmandelver,--
Givemeleave.Hereliesthewater;good:here
standstheman;good;ifthemangotothiswater,
anddrownhimself,itis,willhe,nillhe,he
goes,--markyouthat;butifthewatercometohim
anddrownhim,hedrownsnothimself:argal,he
thatisnotguiltyofhisowndeathshortensnothisownlife.
Butisthislaw?
Ay,marry,is't;crowner'squestlaw.
Willyouha'thetruthon't?Ifthishadnotbeen
agentlewoman,sheshouldhavebeenburiedouto'
Christianburial.
Why,therethousay'st:andthemorepitythat
greatfolkshouldhavecountenanceinthisworldto
drownorhangthemselves,morethantheireven
Christian.Come,myspade.Thereisnoancient
gentlemanbutgardeners,ditchers,andgrave-makers:
theyholdupAdam'sprofession.
Washeagentleman?
Hewasthefirstthateverborearms.
Why,hehadnone.
What,artaheathen?Howdostthouunderstandthe
Scripture?TheScripturesays'Adamdigged:'
couldhedigwithoutarms?I'llputanother
questiontothee:ifthouanswerestmenottothe
purpose,confessthyself--
Goto.
Whatishethatbuildsstrongerthaneitherthe
mason,theshipwright,orthecarpenter?
Thegallows-maker;forthatframeoutlivesa
thousandtenants.
Ilikethywitwell,ingoodfaith:thegallows
doeswell;buthowdoesitwell?itdoeswellto
thosethatdoin:nowthoudostilltosaythe
gallowsisbuiltstrongerthanthechurch:argal,
thegallowsmaydowelltothee.To'tagain,come.
'Whobuildsstrongerthanamason,ashipwright,or
acarpenter?'
Ay,tellmethat,andunyoke.
Marry,nowIcantell.
To't.
Mass,Icannottell.
Cudgelthybrainsnomoreaboutit,foryourdull
asswillnotmendhispacewithbeating;and,when
youareaskedthisquestionnext,say'a
grave-maker:'thehousesthathemakeslasttill
doomsday.Go,gettheetoYaughan:fetchmea
stoupofliquor.
Inyouth,whenIdidlove,didlove,
Methoughtitwasverysweet,
Tocontract,O,thetime,for,ah,mybehove,
O,methought,therewasnothingmeet.
Hasthisfellownofeelingofhisbusiness,thathe
singsatgrave-making?
Customhathmadeitinhimapropertyofeasiness.
'Tise'enso:thehandoflittleemploymenthath
thedaintiersense.
<STAGEDIR>Sings</STAGEDIR>
Butage,withhisstealingsteps,
Hathclaw'dmeinhisclutch,
Andhathshippedmeintiltheland,
AsifIhadneverbeensuch.
Thatskullhadatongueinit,andcouldsingonce:
howtheknavejowlsittotheground,asifitwere
Cain'sjaw-bone,thatdidthefirstmurder!It
mightbethepateofapolitician,whichthisass
nowo'er-reaches;onethatwouldcircumventGod,
mightitnot?
Itmight,mylord.
Orofacourtier;whichcouldsay'Goodmorrow,
sweetlord!Howdostthou,goodlord?'Thismight
bemylordsuch-a-one,thatpraisedmylord
such-a-one'shorse,whenhemeanttobegit;mightitnot?
Ay,mylord.
Why,e'enso:andnowmyLadyWorm's;chapless,and
knockedaboutthemazzardwithasexton'sspade:
here'sfinerevolution,anwehadthetrickto
see't.Didthesebonescostnomorethebreeding,
buttoplayatloggatswith'em?mineachetothinkon't.
Apick-axe,andaspade,aspade,
Forandashroudingsheet:
O,apitofclayfortobemade
Forsuchaguestismeet.
There'sanother:whymaynotthatbetheskullofa
lawyer?Wherebehisquidditiesnow,hisquillets,
hiscases,histenures,andhistricks?whydoeshe
sufferthisrudeknavenowtoknockhimaboutthe
sconcewithadirtyshovel,andwillnottellhimof
hisactionofbattery?Hum!Thisfellowmightbe
in'stimeagreatbuyerofland,withhisstatutes,
hisrecognizances,hisfines,hisdoublevouchers,
hisrecoveries:isthisthefineofhisfines,and
therecoveryofhisrecoveries,tohavehisfine
patefulloffinedirt?willhisvouchersvouchhim
nomoreofhispurchases,anddoubleonestoo,than
thelengthandbreadthofapairofindentures?The
veryconveyancesofhislandswillhardlyliein
thisbox;andmusttheinheritorhimselfhavenomore,ha?
Notajotmore,mylord.
Isnotparchmentmadeofsheepskins?
Ay,mylord,andofcalf-skinstoo.
Theyaresheepandcalveswhichseekoutassurance
inthat.Iwillspeaktothisfellow.Whose
grave'sthis,sirrah?
Mine,sir.
O,apitofclayfortobemade
Forsuchaguestismeet.
Ithinkitbethine,indeed;forthouliestin't.
Youlieouton't,sir,andthereforeitisnot
yours:formypart,Idonotliein't,andyetitismine.
'Thoudostliein't,tobein'tandsayitisthine:
'tisforthedead,notforthequick;thereforethouliest.
'Tisaquicklie,sir;'twillawaygain,frommeto
you.
Whatmandostthoudigitfor?
Fornoman,sir.
Whatwoman,then?
Fornone,neither.
Whoistobeburiedin't?
Onethatwasawoman,sir;but,resthersoul,she'sdead.
Howabsolutetheknaveis!wemustspeakbythe
card,orequivocationwillundous.BytheLord,
Horatio,thesethreeyearsIhavetakenanoteof
it;theageisgrownsopickedthatthetoeofthe
peasantcomessoneartheheelofthecourtier,he
gaffshiskibe.Howlonghastthoubeena
grave-maker?
Ofallthedaysi'theyear,Icameto'tthatday
thatourlastkingHamletovercameFortinbras.
Howlongisthatsince?
Cannotyoutellthat?everyfoolcantellthat:it
wastheverydaythatyoungHamletwasborn;hethat
ismad,andsentintoEngland.
Ay,marry,whywashesentintoEngland?
Why,becausehewasmad:heshallrecoverhiswits
there;or,ifhedonot,it'snogreatmatterthere.
Why?
'Twill,anotbeseeninhimthere;therethemen
areasmadashe.
Howcamehemad?
Verystrangely,theysay.
Howstrangely?
Faith,e'enwithlosinghiswits.
Uponwhatground?
Why,hereinDenmark:Ihavebeensextonhere,man
andboy,thirtyyears.
Howlongwillamanliei'theearthereherot?
I'faith,ifhebenotrottenbeforehedie--aswe
havemanypockycorsesnow-a-days,thatwillscarce
holdthelayingin--hewilllastyousomeeightyear
ornineyear:atannerwilllastyounineyear.
Whyhemorethananother?
Why,sir,hishideissotannedwithhistrade,that
hewillkeepoutwateragreatwhile;andyourwater
isasoredecayerofyourwhoresondeadbody.
Here'saskullnow;thisskullhaslainintheearth
threeandtwentyyears.
Whosewasit?
Awhoresonmadfellow'sitwas:whosedoyouthinkitwas?
Nay,Iknownot.
Apestilenceonhimforamadrogue!a'poureda
flagonofRhenishonmyheadonce.Thissameskull,
sir,wasYorick'sskull,theking'sjester.
This?
E'enthat.
Letmesee.
Alas,poorYorick!Iknewhim,Horatio:afellow
ofinfinitejest,ofmostexcellentfancy:hehath
bornemeonhisbackathousandtimes;andnow,how
abhorredinmyimaginationitis!mygorgerimsat
it.HerehungthoselipsthatIhavekissedIknow
nothowoft.Wherebeyourgibesnow?your
gambols?yoursongs?yourflashesofmerriment,
thatwerewonttosetthetableonaroar?Notone
now,tomockyourowngrinning?quitechap-fallen?
Nowgetyoutomylady'schamber,andtellher,let
herpaintaninchthick,tothisfavourshemust
come;makeherlaughatthat.Prithee,Horatio,tell
meonething.
What'sthat,mylord?
DostthouthinkAlexanderlookedo'thisfashioni'
theearth?
E'enso.
Andsmeltso?pah!
E'enso,mylord.
Towhatbaseuseswemayreturn,Horatio!Whymay
notimaginationtracethenobledustofAlexander,
tillhefinditstoppingabung-hole?
'Tweretoconsidertoocuriously,toconsiderso.
No,faith,notajot;buttofollowhimthitherwith
modestyenough,andlikelihoodtoleadit:as
thus:Alexanderdied,Alexanderwasburied,
Alexanderreturnethintodust;thedustisearth;of
earthwemakeloam;andwhyofthatloam,wheretohe
wasconverted,mighttheynotstopabeer-barrel?
ImperiousCaesar,deadandturn'dtoclay,
Mightstopaholetokeepthewindaway:
O,thatthatearth,whichkepttheworldinawe,
Shouldpatchawalltoexpelthewinterflaw!
Butsoft!butsoft!aside:herecomestheking.
Thequeen,thecourtiers:whoisthistheyfollow?
Andwithsuchmaimedrites?Thisdothbetoken
Thecorsetheyfollowdidwithdesperatehand
Fordoitsownlife:'twasofsomeestate.
Couchweawhile,andmark.
Whatceremonyelse?
ThatisLaertes,
Averynobleyouth:mark.
Whatceremonyelse?
Herobsequieshavebeenasfarenlarged
Aswehavewarrantise:herdeathwasdoubtful;
And,butthatgreatcommando'erswaystheorder,
Sheshouldingroundunsanctifiedhavelodged
Tillthelasttrumpet:forcharitableprayers,
Shards,flintsandpebblesshouldbethrownonher;
Yetheresheisallow'dhervirgincrants,
Hermaidenstrewmentsandthebringinghome
Ofbellandburial.
Musttherenomorebedone?
Nomorebedone:
Weshouldprofanetheserviceofthedead
Tosingarequiemandsuchresttoher
Astopeace-partedsouls.
Layheri'theearth:
Andfromherfairandunpollutedflesh
Mayvioletsspring!Itellthee,churlishpriest,
Aministeringangelshallmysisterbe,
Whenthouliesthowling.
What,thefairOphelia!
Sweetstothesweet:farewell!
IhopedthoushouldsthavebeenmyHamlet'swife;
Ithoughtthybride-bedtohavedeck'd,sweetmaid,
Andnothavestrew'dthygrave.
O,treblewoe
Falltentimestrebleonthatcursedhead,
Whosewickeddeedthymostingenioussense
Deprivedtheeof!Holdofftheearthawhile,
TillIhavecaughtheroncemoreinminearms:
Nowpileyourdustuponthequickanddead,
Tillofthisflatamountainyouhavemade,
Too'ertopoldPelion,ortheskyishhead
OfblueOlympus.
<STAGEDIR>Advancing</STAGEDIR>Whatishewhosegrief
Bearssuchanemphasis?whosephraseofsorrow
Conjuresthewanderingstars,andmakesthemstand
Likewonder-woundedhearers?ThisisI,
HamlettheDane.
Thedeviltakethysoul!
Thoupray'stnotwell.
Iprithee,takethyfingersfrommythroat;
For,thoughIamnotsplenitiveandrash,
YethaveIsomethinginmedangerous,
Whichletthywisenessfear:holdoffthyhand.
Pluckthemasunder.
Hamlet,Hamlet!
Gentlemen,--
Goodmylord,bequiet.
WhyIwillfightwithhimuponthistheme
Untilmyeyelidswillnolongerwag.
Omyson,whattheme?
IlovedOphelia:fortythousandbrothers
Couldnot,withalltheirquantityoflove,
Makeupmysum.Whatwiltthoudoforher?
O,heismad,Laertes.
ForloveofGod,forbearhim.
'Swounds,showmewhatthou'ltdo:
Woo'tweep?woo'tfight?woo'tfast?woo'ttearthyself?
Woo'tdrinkupeisel?eatacrocodile?
I'lldo't.Dostthoucomeheretowhine?
Tooutfacemewithleapinginhergrave?
Beburiedquickwithher,andsowillI:
And,ifthouprateofmountains,letthemthrow
Millionsofacresonus,tillourground,
Singeinghispateagainsttheburningzone,
MakeOssalikeawart!Nay,anthou'ltmouth,
I'llrantaswellasthou.
Thisismeremadness:
Andthusawhilethefitwillworkonhim;
Anon,aspatientasthefemaledove,
Whenthathergoldencoupletsaredisclosed,
Hissilencewillsitdrooping.
Hearyou,sir;
Whatisthereasonthatyouusemethus?
Ilovedyouever:butitisnomatter;
LetHerculeshimselfdowhathemay,
Thecatwillmewanddogwillhavehisday.
Iprayyou,goodHoratio,waituponhim.
Strengthenyourpatienceinourlastnight'sspeech;
We'llputthemattertothepresentpush.
GoodGertrude,setsomewatchoveryourson.
Thisgraveshallhavealivingmonument:
Anhourofquietshortlyshallwesee;
Tillthen,inpatienceourproceedingbe.
Somuchforthis,sir:nowshallyouseetheother;
Youdorememberallthecircumstance?
Rememberit,mylord?
Sir,inmyhearttherewasakindoffighting,
Thatwouldnotletmesleep:methoughtIlay
Worsethanthemutinesinthebilboes.Rashly,
Andpraisedberashnessforit,letusknow,
Ourindiscretionsometimesservesuswell,
Whenourdeepplotsdopall:andthatshouldteachus
There'sadivinitythatshapesourends,
Rough-hewthemhowwewill,--
Thatismostcertain.
Upfrommycabin,
Mysea-gownscarf'daboutme,inthedark
GropedItofindoutthem;hadmydesire.
Finger'dtheirpacket,andinfinewithdrew
Tomineownroomagain;makingsobold,
Myfearsforgettingmanners,tounseal
Theirgrandcommission;whereIfound,Horatio,--
Oroyalknavery!--anexactcommand,
Lardedwithmanyseveralsortsofreasons
ImportingDenmark'shealthandEngland'stoo,
With,ho!suchbugsandgoblinsinmylife,
That,onthesupervise,noleisurebated,
No,nottostaythegrindingoftheaxe,
Myheadshouldbestruckoff.
Is'tpossible?
Here'sthecommission:readitatmoreleisure.
ButwiltthouhearmehowIdidproceed?
Ibeseechyou.
Beingthusbe-nettedroundwithvillanies,--
EreIcouldmakeaprologuetomybrains,
Theyhadbeguntheplay--Isatmedown,
Devisedanewcommission,wroteitfair:
Ioncedidholdit,asourstatistsdo,
Abasenesstowritefairandlabour'dmuch
Howtoforgetthatlearning,but,sir,now
Itdidmeyeoman'sservice:wiltthouknow
TheeffectofwhatIwrote?
Ay,goodmylord.
Anearnestconjurationfromtheking,
AsEnglandwashisfaithfultributary,
Aslovebetweenthemlikethepalmmightflourish,
Aspeaceshouldstiffherwheatengarlandwear
Andstandacomma'tweentheiramities,
Andmanysuch-like'As'esofgreatcharge,
That,ontheviewandknowingofthesecontents,
Withoutdebatementfurther,moreorless,
Heshouldthebearersputtosuddendeath,
Notshriving-timeallow'd.
Howwasthisseal'd?
Why,eveninthatwasheavenordinant.
Ihadmyfather'ssignetinmypurse,
WhichwasthemodelofthatDanishseal;
Foldedthewritupinformoftheother,
Subscribedit,gave'ttheimpression,placeditsafely,
Thechangelingneverknown.Now,thenextday
Wasoursea-fight;andwhattothiswassequent
Thouknow'stalready.
SoGuildensternandRosencrantzgoto't.
Why,man,theydidmakelovetothisemployment;
Theyarenotnearmyconscience;theirdefeat
Doesbytheirowninsinuationgrow:
'Tisdangerouswhenthebasernaturecomes
Betweenthepassandfellincensedpoints
Ofmightyopposites.
Why,whatakingisthis!
Doesitnot,think'stthee,standmenowupon--
Hethathathkill'dmykingandwhoredmymother,
Popp'dinbetweentheelectionandmyhopes,
Thrownouthisangleformyproperlife,
Andwithsuchcozenage--is'tnotperfectconscience,
Toquithimwiththisarm?andis'tnottobedamn'd,
Toletthiscankerofournaturecome
Infurtherevil?
ItmustbeshortlyknowntohimfromEngland
Whatistheissueofthebusinessthere.
Itwillbeshort:theinterimismine;
Andaman'slife'snomorethantosay'One.'
ButIamverysorry,goodHoratio,
ThattoLaertesIforgotmyself;
For,bytheimageofmycause,Isee
Theportraitureofhis:I'llcourthisfavours.
But,sure,thebraveryofhisgriefdidputme
Intoatoweringpassion.
Peace!whocomeshere?
YourlordshipisrightwelcomebacktoDenmark.
Ihumblythankyou,sir.Dostknowthiswater-fly?
No,mygoodlord.
Thystateisthemoregracious;for'tisaviceto
knowhim.Hehathmuchland,andfertile:leta
beastbelordofbeasts,andhiscribshallstandat
theking'smess:'tisachough;but,asIsay,
spaciousinthepossessionofdirt.
Sweetlord,ifyourlordshipwereatleisure,I
shouldimpartathingtoyoufromhismajesty.
Iwillreceiveit,sir,withalldiligenceof
spirit.Putyourbonnettohisrightuse;'tisforthehead.
Ithankyourlordship,itisveryhot.
No,believeme,'tisverycold;thewindis
northerly.
Itisindifferentcold,mylord,indeed.
Butyetmethinksitisverysultryandhotformy
complexion.
Exceedingly,mylord;itisverysultry,--as
'twere,--Icannottellhow.But,mylord,his
majestybademesignifytoyouthathehaslaida
greatwageronyourhead:sir,thisisthematter,--
Ibeseechyou,remember--
Nay,goodmylord;formineease,ingoodfaith.
Sir,hereisnewlycometocourtLaertes;believe
me,anabsolutegentleman,fullofmostexcellent
differences,ofverysoftsocietyandgreatshowing:
indeed,tospeakfeelinglyofhim,heisthecardor
calendarofgentry,foryoushallfindinhimthe
continentofwhatpartagentlemanwouldsee.
Sir,hisdefinementsuffersnoperditioninyou;
though,Iknow,todividehiminventoriallywould
dizzythearithmeticofmemory,andyetbutyaw
neither,inrespectofhisquicksail.But,inthe
verityofextolment,Itakehimtobeasoulof
greatarticle;andhisinfusionofsuchdearthand
rareness,as,tomaketruedictionofhim,his
semblableishismirror;andwhoelsewouldtrace
him,hisumbrage,nothingmore.
Yourlordshipspeaksmostinfalliblyofhim.
Theconcernancy,sir?whydowewrapthegentleman
inourmorerawerbreath?
Sir?
Is'tnotpossibletounderstandinanothertongue?
Youwilldo't,sir,really.
Whatimportsthenominationofthisgentleman?
OfLaertes?
Hispurseisemptyalready;all'sgoldenwordsarespent.
Ofhim,sir.
Iknowyouarenotignorant--
Iwouldyoudid,sir;yet,infaith,ifyoudid,
itwouldnotmuchapproveme.Well,sir?
YouarenotignorantofwhatexcellenceLaertesis--
Idarenotconfessthat,lestIshouldcomparewith
himinexcellence;but,toknowamanwell,wereto
knowhimself.
Imean,sir,forhisweapon;butintheimputation
laidonhimbythem,inhismeedhe'sunfellowed.
What'shisweapon?
Rapieranddagger.
That'stwoofhisweapons:but,well.
Theking,sir,hathwageredwithhimsixBarbary
horses:againstthewhichhehasimponed,asItake
it,sixFrenchrapiersandponiards,withtheir
assigns,asgirdle,hangers,andso:threeofthe
carriages,infaith,areverydeartofancy,very
responsivetothehilts,mostdelicatecarriages,
andofveryliberalconceit.
Whatcallyouthecarriages?
Iknewyoumustbeedifiedbythemargentereyouhaddone.
Thecarriages,sir,arethehangers.
Thephrasewouldbemoregermantothematter,ifwe
couldcarrycannonbyoursides:Iwoulditmight
behangerstillthen.But,on:sixBarbaryhorses
againstsixFrenchswords,theirassigns,andthree
liberal-conceitedcarriages;that'stheFrenchbet
againsttheDanish.Whyisthis'imponed,'asyoucallit?
Theking,sir,hathlaid,thatinadozenpasses
betweenyourselfandhim,heshallnotexceedyou
threehits:hehathlaidontwelvefornine;andit
wouldcometoimmediatetrial,ifyourlordship
wouldvouchsafetheanswer.
HowifIanswer'no'?
Imean,mylord,theoppositionofyourpersonintrial.
Sir,Iwillwalkhereinthehall:ifitpleasehis
majesty,'tisthebreathingtimeofdaywithme;let
thefoilsbebrought,thegentlemanwilling,andthe
kingholdhispurpose,IwillwinforhimanIcan;
ifnot,Iwillgainnothingbutmyshameandtheoddhits.
ShallIre-deliveryoue'enso?
Tothiseffect,sir;afterwhatflourishyournaturewill.
Icommendmydutytoyourlordship.
Yours,yours.
Hedoeswelltocommendithimself;thereareno
tongueselsefor'sturn.
Thislapwingrunsawaywiththeshellonhishead.
Hedidcomplywithhisdug,beforehesuckedit.
Thushashe--andmanymoreofthesamebevythatI
knowthedressyagedoteson--onlygotthetuneof
thetimeandoutwardhabitofencounter;akindof
yestycollection,whichcarriesthemthroughand
throughthemostfondandwinnowedopinions;anddo
butblowthemtotheirtrial,thebubblesareout.
Mylord,hismajestycommendedhimtoyoubyyoung
Osric,whobringsbacktohimthatyouattendhimin
thehall:hesendstoknowifyourpleasureholdto
playwithLaertes,orthatyouwilltakelongertime.
Iamconstanttomypurpose;theyfollowtheking's
pleasure:ifhisfitnessspeaks,mineisready;now
orwhensoever,providedIbesoableasnow.
Thekingandqueenandallarecomingdown.
Inhappytime.
Thequeendesiresyoutousesomegentle
entertainmenttoLaertesbeforeyoufalltoplay.
Shewellinstructsme.
Youwilllosethiswager,mylord.
Idonotthinkso:sincehewentintoFrance,I
havebeenincontinualpractise:Ishallwinatthe
odds.Butthouwouldstnotthinkhowillall'shere
aboutmyheart:butitisnomatter.
Nay,goodmylord,--
Itisbutfoolery;butitissuchakindof
gain-giving,aswouldperhapstroubleawoman.
Ifyourminddislikeanything,obeyit:Iwill
forestalltheirrepairhither,andsayyouarenot
fit.
Notawhit,wedefyaugury:there'saspecial
providenceinthefallofasparrow.Ifitbenow,
'tisnottocome;ifitbenottocome,itwillbe
now;ifitbenotnow,yetitwillcome:the
readinessisall:sincenomanhasaughtofwhathe
leaves,whatis'ttoleavebetimes?
Come,Hamlet,come,andtakethishandfromme.
Givemeyourpardon,sir:I'vedoneyouwrong;
Butpardon't,asyouareagentleman.
Thispresenceknows,
Andyoumustneedshaveheard,howIampunish'd
Withsoredistraction.WhatIhavedone,
Thatmightyournature,honourandexception
Roughlyawake,Ihereproclaimwasmadness.
Was'tHamletwrong'dLaertes?NeverHamlet:
IfHamletfromhimselfbeta'enaway,
Andwhenhe'snothimselfdoeswrongLaertes,
ThenHamletdoesitnot,Hamletdeniesit.
Whodoesit,then?Hismadness:if'tbeso,
Hamletisofthefactionthatiswrong'd;
HismadnessispoorHamlet'senemy.
Sir,inthisaudience,
Letmydisclaimingfromapurposedevil
Freemesofarinyourmostgenerousthoughts,
ThatIhaveshotminearrowo'erthehouse,
Andhurtmybrother.
Iamsatisfiedinnature,
Whosemotive,inthiscase,shouldstirmemost
Tomyrevenge:butinmytermsofhonour
Istandaloof;andwillnoreconcilement,
Tillbysomeeldermasters,ofknownhonour,
Ihaveavoiceandprecedentofpeace,
Tokeepmynameungored.Buttillthattime,
Idoreceiveyouroffer'dlovelikelove,
Andwillnotwrongit.
Iembraceitfreely;
Andwillthisbrother'swagerfranklyplay.
Giveusthefoils.Comeon.
Come,oneforme.
I'llbeyourfoil,Laertes:inmineignorance
Yourskillshall,likeastari'thedarkestnight,
Stickfieryoffindeed.
Youmockme,sir.
No,bythishand.
Givethemthefoils,youngOsric.CousinHamlet,
Youknowthewager?
Verywell,mylord
Yourgracehathlaidtheoddso'theweakerside.
Idonotfearit;Ihaveseenyouboth:
Butsinceheisbetter'd,wehavethereforeodds.
Thisistooheavy,letmeseeanother.
Thislikesmewell.Thesefoilshaveallalength?
Ay,mygoodlord.
Setmethestoopsofwineuponthattable.
IfHamletgivethefirstorsecondhit,
Orquitinanswerofthethirdexchange,
Letallthebattlementstheirordnancefire:
ThekingshalldrinktoHamlet'sbetterbreath;
Andinthecupanunionshallhethrow,
Richerthanthatwhichfoursuccessivekings
InDenmark'scrownhaveworn.Givemethecups;
Andletthekettletothetrumpetspeak,
Thetrumpettothecannoneerwithout,
Thecannonstotheheavens,theheavenstoearth,
'NowthekingdunkstoHamlet.'Come,begin:
Andyou,thejudges,bearawaryeye.
Comeon,sir.
Come,mylord.
One.
No.
Judgment.
Ahit,averypalpablehit.
Well;again.
Stay;givemedrink.Hamlet,thispearlisthine;
Here'stothyhealth.
Givehimthecup.
I'llplaythisboutfirst;setitbyawhile.Come.
Anotherhit;whatsayyou?
Atouch,atouch,Idoconfess.
Oursonshallwin.
He'sfat,andscantofbreath.
Here,Hamlet,takemynapkin,rubthybrows;
Thequeencarousestothyfortune,Hamlet.
Goodmadam!
Gertrude,donotdrink.
Iwill,mylord;Iprayyou,pardonme.
<STAGEDIR>Aside</STAGEDIR>Itisthepoison'dcup:itistoolate.
Idarenotdrinkyet,madam;byandby.
Come,letmewipethyface.
Mylord,I'llhithimnow.
Idonotthink't.
<STAGEDIR>Aside</STAGEDIR>Andyet'tisalmost'gainstmyconscience.
Come,forthethird,Laertes:youbutdally;
Iprayyou,passwithyourbestviolence;
Iamafeardyoumakeawantonofme.
Sayyouso?comeon.
Nothing,neitherway.
Haveatyounow!
Partthem;theyareincensed.
Nay,come,again.
Looktothequeenthere,ho!
Theybleedonbothsides.Howisit,mylord?
Howis't,Laertes?
Why,asawoodcocktomineownspringe,Osric;
Iamjustlykill'dwithmineowntreachery.
Howdoesthequeen?
Sheswoundstoseethembleed.
No,no,thedrink,thedrink,--OmydearHamlet,--
Thedrink,thedrink!Iampoison'd.
Ovillany!Ho!letthedoorbelock'd:
Treachery!Seekitout.
Itishere,Hamlet:Hamlet,thouartslain;
Nomedicineintheworldcandotheegood;
Intheethereisnothalfanhouroflife;
Thetreacherousinstrumentisinthyhand,
Unbatedandenvenom'd:thefoulpractise
Hathturn'ditselfonmelo,hereIlie,
Nevertoriseagain:thymother'spoison'd:
Icannomore:theking,theking'stoblame.
Thepoint!--envenom'dtoo!
Then,venom,tothywork.
Treason!treason!
O,yetdefendme,friends;Iambuthurt.
Here,thouincestuous,murderous,damnedDane,
Drinkoffthispotion.Isthyunionhere?
Followmymother.
Heisjustlyserved;
Itisapoisontemper'dbyhimself.
Exchangeforgivenesswithme,nobleHamlet:
Mineandmyfather'sdeathcomenotuponthee,
Northineonme.
Heavenmaketheefreeofit!Ifollowthee.
Iamdead,Horatio.Wretchedqueen,adieu!
Youthatlookpaleandtrembleatthischance,
Thatarebutmutesoraudiencetothisact,
HadIbuttime--asthisfellsergeant,death,
Isstrictinhisarrest--O,Icouldtellyou--
Butletitbe.Horatio,Iamdead;
Thoulivest;reportmeandmycausearight
Totheunsatisfied.
Neverbelieveit:
IammoreanantiqueRomanthanaDane:
Here'syetsomeliquorleft.
Asthou'rtaman,
Givemethecup:letgo;byheaven,I'llhave't.
OgoodHoratio,whatawoundedname,
Thingsstandingthusunknown,shalllivebehindme!
Ifthoudidsteverholdmeinthyheart
Absenttheefromfelicityawhile,
Andinthisharshworlddrawthybreathinpain,
Totellmystory.
Whatwarlikenoiseisthis?
YoungFortinbras,withconquestcomefromPoland,
TotheambassadorsofEnglandgives
Thiswarlikevolley.
O,Idie,Horatio;
Thepotentpoisonquiteo'er-crowsmyspirit:
IcannotlivetohearthenewsfromEngland;
ButIdoprophesytheelectionlights
OnFortinbras:hehasmydyingvoice;
Sotellhim,withtheoccurrents,moreandless,
Whichhavesolicited.Therestissilence.
Nowcracksanobleheart.Goodnightsweetprince:
Andflightsofangelssingtheetothyrest!
Whydoesthedrumcomehither?
Whereisthissight?
Whatisityewouldsee?
Ifaughtofwoeorwonder,ceaseyoursearch.
Thisquarrycriesonhavoc.Oprouddeath,
Whatfeastistowardinthineeternalcell,
Thatthousomanyprincesatashot
Sobloodilyhaststruck?
Thesightisdismal;
AndouraffairsfromEnglandcometoolate:
Theearsaresenselessthatshouldgiveushearing,
Totellhimhiscommandmentisfulfill'd,
ThatRosencrantzandGuildensternaredead:
Whereshouldwehaveourthanks?
Notfromhismouth,
Hadittheabilityoflifetothankyou:
Henevergavecommandmentfortheirdeath.
Butsince,sojumpuponthisbloodyquestion,
YoufromthePolackwars,andyoufromEngland,
Areherearrivedgiveorderthatthesebodies
Highonastagebeplacedtotheview;
Andletmespeaktotheyetunknowingworld
Howthesethingscameabout:soshallyouhear
Ofcarnal,bloody,andunnaturalacts,
Ofaccidentaljudgments,casualslaughters,
Ofdeathsputonbycunningandforcedcause,
And,inthisupshot,purposesmistook
Fall'nontheinventors'reads:allthiscanI
Trulydeliver.
Letushastetohearit,
Andcallthenoblesttotheaudience.
Forme,withsorrowIembracemyfortune:
Ihavesomerightsofmemoryinthiskingdom,
Whichnowtoclaimmyvantagedothinviteme.
OfthatIshallhavealsocausetospeak,
Andfromhismouthwhosevoicewilldrawonmore;
Butletthissamebepresentlyperform'd,
Evenwhilemen'smindsarewild;lestmoremischance
Onplotsanderrors,happen.
Letfourcaptains
BearHamlet,likeasoldier,tothestage;
Forhewaslikely,hadhebeenputon,
Tohaveprovedmostroyally:and,forhispassage,
Thesoldiers'musicandtheritesofwar
Speakloudlyforhim.
Takeupthebodies:suchasightasthis
Becomesthefield,buthereshowsmuchamiss.
Go,bidthesoldiersshoot.
