Whenshallwethreemeetagain
Inthunder,lightning,orinrain?
Whenthehurlyburly'sdone,
Whenthebattle'slostandwon.
Thatwillbeerethesetofsun.
Wheretheplace?
Upontheheath.
TheretomeetwithMacbeth.
Icome,Graymalkin!
Paddockcalls.
Anon.
Fairisfoul,andfoulisfair:
Hoverthroughthefogandfilthyair.
Whatbloodymanisthat?Hecanreport,
Asseemethbyhisplight,oftherevolt
Theneweststate.
Thisisthesergeant
Wholikeagoodandhardysoldierfought
'Gainstmycaptivity.Hail,bravefriend!
Saytothekingtheknowledgeofthebroil
Asthoudidstleaveit.
Doubtfulitstood;
Astwospentswimmers,thatdoclingtogether
Andchoketheirart.ThemercilessMacdonwald--
Worthytobearebel,fortothat
Themultiplyingvillaniesofnature
Doswarmuponhim--fromthewesternisles
Ofkernsandgallowglassesissupplied;
Andfortune,onhisdamnedquarrelsmiling,
Show'dlikearebel'swhore:butall'stooweak:
ForbraveMacbeth--wellhedeservesthatname--
Disdainingfortune,withhisbrandish'dsteel,
Whichsmokedwithbloodyexecution,
Likevalour'sminioncarvedouthispassage
Tillhefacedtheslave;
Whichne'ershookhands,norbadefarewelltohim,
Tillheunseam'dhimfromthenavetothechaps,
Andfix'dhisheaduponourbattlements.
Ovaliantcousin!worthygentleman!
Aswhencethesun'ginshisreflection
Shipwreckingstormsanddirefulthundersbreak,
Sofromthatspringwhencecomfortseem'dtocome
Discomfortswells.Mark,kingofScotland,mark:
Nosoonerjusticehadwithvalourarm'd
Compell'dtheseskippingkernstotrusttheirheels,
ButtheNorweyanlordsurveyingvantage,
Withfurbish'darmsandnewsuppliesofmen
Beganafreshassault.
Dismay'dnotthis
Ourcaptains,MacbethandBanquo?
Yes;
Assparrowseagles,ortheharethelion.
IfIsaysooth,Imustreporttheywere
Ascannonsoverchargedwithdoublecracks,sothey
Doublyredoubledstrokesuponthefoe:
Excepttheymeanttobatheinreekingwounds,
OrmemoriseanotherGolgotha,
Icannottell.
ButIamfaint,mygashescryforhelp.
Sowellthywordsbecometheeasthywounds;
Theysmackofhonourboth.Gogethimsurgeons.
Whocomeshere?
TheworthythaneofRoss.
Whatahastelooksthroughhiseyes!Soshouldhelook
Thatseemstospeakthingsstrange.
Godsavetheking!
Whencecamestthou,worthythane?
FromFife,greatking;
WheretheNorweyanbannersfloutthesky
Andfanourpeoplecold.Norwayhimself,
Withterriblenumbers,
Assistedbythatmostdisloyaltraitor
ThethaneofCawdor,beganadismalconflict;
TillthatBellona'sbridegroom,lapp'dinproof,
Confrontedhimwithself-comparisons,
Pointagainstpointrebellious,arm'gainstarm.
Curbinghislavishspirit:and,toconclude,
Thevictoryfellonus.
Greathappiness!
Thatnow
Sweno,theNorways'king,cravescomposition:
Norwouldwedeignhimburialofhismen
TillhedisbursedatSaintColme'sinch
Tenthousanddollarstoourgeneraluse.
NomorethatthaneofCawdorshalldeceive
Ourbosominterest:gopronouncehispresentdeath,
AndwithhisformertitlegreetMacbeth.
I'llseeitdone.
WhathehathlostnobleMacbethhathwon.
Wherehastthoubeen,sister?
Killingswine.
Sister,wherethou?
Asailor'swifehadchestnutsinherlap,
Andmunch'd,andmunch'd,andmunch'd:--
'Giveme,'quothI:
'Arointthee,witch!'therump-fedronyoncries.
Herhusband'stoAleppogone,mastero'theTiger:
ButinasieveI'llthithersail,
And,likearatwithoutatail,
I'lldo,I'lldo,andI'lldo.
I'llgivetheeawind.
Thou'rtkind.
AndIanother.
Imyselfhavealltheother,
Andtheveryportstheyblow,
Allthequartersthattheyknow
I'theshipman'scard.
Iwilldrainhimdryashay:
Sleepshallneithernightnorday
Hanguponhispent-houselid;
Heshallliveamanforbid:
Wearyse'nnightsninetimesnine
Shallhedwindle,peakandpine:
Thoughhisbarkcannotbelost,
Yetitshallbetempest-tost.
LookwhatIhave.
Showme,showme.
HereIhaveapilot'sthumb,
Wreck'dashomewardhedidcome.
Adrum,adrum!
Macbethdothcome.
Theweirdsisters,handinhand,
Postersoftheseaandland,
Thusdogoabout,about:
Thricetothineandthricetomine
Andthriceagain,tomakeupnine.
Peace!thecharm'swoundup.
SofoulandfairadayIhavenotseen.
Howfaris'tcall'dtoForres?Whatarethese
Sowither'dandsowildintheirattire,
Thatlooknotliketheinhabitantso'theearth,
Andyetareon't?Liveyou?orareyouaught
Thatmanmayquestion?Youseemtounderstandme,
Byeachatonceherchappyfingerlaying
Uponherskinnylips:youshouldbewomen,
Andyetyourbeardsforbidmetointerpret
Thatyouareso.
Speak,ifyoucan:whatareyou?
Allhail,Macbeth!hailtothee,thaneofGlamis!
Allhail,Macbeth,hailtothee,thaneofCawdor!
Allhail,Macbeth,thoushaltbekinghereafter!
Goodsir,whydoyoustart;andseemtofear
Thingsthatdosoundsofair?I'thenameoftruth,
Areyefantastical,orthatindeed
Whichoutwardlyyeshow?Mynoblepartner
Yougreetwithpresentgraceandgreatprediction
Ofnoblehavingandofroyalhope,
Thatheseemsraptwithal:tomeyouspeaknot.
Ifyoucanlookintotheseedsoftime,
Andsaywhichgrainwillgrowandwhichwillnot,
Speakthentome,whoneitherbegnorfear
Yourfavoursnoryourhate.
Hail!
Hail!
Hail!
LesserthanMacbeth,andgreater.
Notsohappy,yetmuchhappier.
Thoushaltgetkings,thoughthoubenone:
Soallhail,MacbethandBanquo!
BanquoandMacbeth,allhail!
Stay,youimperfectspeakers,tellmemore:
BySinel'sdeathIknowIamthaneofGlamis;
ButhowofCawdor?thethaneofCawdorlives,
Aprosperousgentleman;andtobeking
Standsnotwithintheprospectofbelief,
NomorethantobeCawdor.Sayfromwhence
Youowethisstrangeintelligence?orwhy
Uponthisblastedheathyoustopourway
Withsuchpropheticgreeting?Speak,Ichargeyou.
Theearthhathbubbles,asthewaterhas,
Andtheseareofthem.Whitheraretheyvanish'd?
Intotheair;andwhatseem'dcorporalmelted
Asbreathintothewind.Wouldtheyhadstay'd!
Weresuchthingshereaswedospeakabout?
Orhaveweeatenontheinsaneroot
Thattakesthereasonprisoner?
Yourchildrenshallbekings.
Youshallbeking.
AndthaneofCawdortoo:wentitnotso?
Totheselfsametuneandwords.Who'shere?
Thekinghathhappilyreceived,Macbeth,
Thenewsofthysuccess;andwhenhereads
Thypersonalventureintherebels'fight,
Hiswondersandhispraisesdocontend
Whichshouldbethineorhis:silencedwiththat,
Inviewingo'ertheresto'theselfsameday,
HefindstheeinthestoutNorweyanranks,
Nothingafeardofwhatthyselfdidstmake,
Strangeimagesofdeath.Asthickashail
Camepostwithpost;andeveryonedidbear
Thypraisesinhiskingdom'sgreatdefence,
Andpour'dthemdownbeforehim.
Wearesent
Togivetheefromourroyalmasterthanks;
Onlytoheraldtheeintohissight,
Notpaythee.
And,foranearnestofagreaterhonour,
Hebademe,fromhim,calltheethaneofCawdor:
Inwhichaddition,hail,mostworthythane!
Foritisthine.
What,canthedevilspeaktrue?
ThethaneofCawdorlives:whydoyoudressme
Inborrow'drobes?
Whowasthethanelivesyet;
Butunderheavyjudgmentbearsthatlife
Whichhedeservestolose.Whetherhewascombined
WiththoseofNorway,ordidlinetherebel
Withhiddenhelpandvantage,orthatwithboth
Helabour'dinhiscountry'swreck,Iknownot;
Buttreasonscapital,confess'dandproved,
Haveoverthrownhim.
<STAGEDIR>Aside</STAGEDIR>Glamis,andthaneofCawdor!
Thegreatestisbehind.
Thanksforyourpains.
Doyounothopeyourchildrenshallbekings,
WhenthosethatgavethethaneofCawdortome
Promisednolesstothem?
Thattrustedhome
Mightyetenkindleyouuntothecrown,
BesidesthethaneofCawdor.But'tisstrange:
Andoftentimes,towinustoourharm,
Theinstrumentsofdarknesstellustruths,
Winuswithhonesttrifles,tobetray's
Indeepestconsequence.
Cousins,aword,Iprayyou.
<STAGEDIR>Aside</STAGEDIR>Twotruthsaretold,
Ashappyprologuestotheswellingact
Oftheimperialtheme.--Ithankyou,gentlemen.
<STAGEDIR>Aside</STAGEDIR>Thissupernaturalsoliciting
Cannotbeill,cannotbegood:ifill,
Whyhathitgivenmeearnestofsuccess,
Commencinginatruth?IamthaneofCawdor:
Ifgood,whydoIyieldtothatsuggestion
Whosehorridimagedothunfixmyhair
Andmakemyseatedheartknockatmyribs,
Againsttheuseofnature?Presentfears
Arelessthanhorribleimaginings:
Mythought,whosemurderyetisbutfantastical,
Shakessomysinglestateofmanthatfunction
Issmother'dinsurmise,andnothingis
Butwhatisnot.
Look,howourpartner'srapt.
<STAGEDIR>Aside</STAGEDIR>Ifchancewillhavemeking,why,chancemaycrownme,
Withoutmystir.
Newhorrorscomeuponhim,
Likeourstrangegarments,cleavenottotheirmould
Butwiththeaidofuse.
<STAGEDIR>Aside</STAGEDIR>Comewhatcomemay,
Timeandthehourrunsthroughtheroughestday.
WorthyMacbeth,westayuponyourleisure.
Givemeyourfavour:mydullbrainwaswrought
Withthingsforgotten.Kindgentlemen,yourpains
Areregister'dwhereeverydayIturn
Theleaftoreadthem.Letustowardtheking.
Thinkuponwhathathchanced,and,atmoretime,
Theinterimhavingweigh'dit,letusspeak
Ourfreeheartseachtoother.
Verygladly.
Tillthen,enough.Come,friends.
IsexecutiondoneonCawdor?Arenot
Thoseincommissionyetreturn'd?
Myliege,
Theyarenotyetcomeback.ButIhavespoke
Withonethatsawhimdie:whodidreport
Thatveryfranklyheconfess'dhistreasons,
Imploredyourhighness'pardonandsetforth
Adeeprepentance:nothinginhislife
Becamehimliketheleavingit;hedied
Asonethathadbeenstudiedinhisdeath
Tothrowawaythedearestthingheowed,
As'twereacarelesstrifle.
There'snoart
Tofindthemind'sconstructionintheface:
HewasagentlemanonwhomIbuilt
Anabsolutetrust.
Oworthiestcousin!
Thesinofmyingratitudeevennow
Washeavyonme:thouartsofarbefore
Thatswiftestwingofrecompenseisslow
Toovertakethee.Wouldthouhadstlessdeserved,
Thattheproportionbothofthanksandpayment
Mighthavebeenmine!onlyIhavelefttosay,
Moreisthyduethanmorethanallcanpay.
TheserviceandtheloyaltyIowe,
Indoingit,paysitself.Yourhighness'part
Istoreceiveourduties;andourduties
Aretoyourthroneandstatechildrenandservants,
Whichdobutwhattheyshould,bydoingeverything
Safetowardyourloveandhonour.
Welcomehither:
Ihavebeguntoplantthee,andwilllabour
Tomaketheefullofgrowing.NobleBanquo,
Thathastnolessdeserved,normustbeknown
Nolesstohavedoneso,letmeenfoldthee
Andholdtheetomyheart.
ThereifIgrow,
Theharvestisyourown.
Myplenteousjoys,
Wantoninfulness,seektohidethemselves
Indropsofsorrow.Sons,kinsmen,thanes,
Andyouwhoseplacesarethenearest,know
Wewillestablishourestateupon
Oureldest,Malcolm,whomwenamehereafter
ThePrinceofCumberland;whichhonourmust
Notunaccompaniedinvesthimonly,
Butsignsofnobleness,likestars,shallshine
Onalldeservers.FromhencetoInverness,
Andbindusfurthertoyou.
Therestislabour,whichisnotusedforyou:
I'llbemyselftheharbingerandmakejoyful
Thehearingofmywifewithyourapproach;
Sohumblytakemyleave.
MyworthyCawdor!
<STAGEDIR>Aside</STAGEDIR>ThePrinceofCumberland!thatisastep
OnwhichImustfalldown,orelseo'erleap,
Forinmywayitlies.Stars,hideyourfires;
Letnotlightseemyblackanddeepdesires:
Theeyewinkatthehand;yetletthatbe,
Whichtheeyefears,whenitisdone,tosee.
True,worthyBanquo;heisfullsovaliant,
AndinhiscommendationsIamfed;
Itisabanquettome.Let'safterhim,
Whosecareisgonebeforetobiduswelcome:
Itisapeerlesskinsman.
'Theymetmeinthedayofsuccess:andIhave
learnedbytheperfectestreport,theyhavemorein
themthanmortalknowledge.WhenIburnedindesire
toquestionthemfurther,theymadethemselvesair,
intowhichtheyvanished.WhilesIstoodraptin
thewonderofit,camemissivesfromtheking,who
all-hailedme'ThaneofCawdor;'bywhichtitle,
before,theseweirdsisterssalutedme,andreferred
metothecomingonoftime,with'Hail,kingthat
shaltbe!'ThishaveIthoughtgoodtodeliver
thee,mydearestpartnerofgreatness,thatthou
mightstnotlosetheduesofrejoicing,bybeing
ignorantofwhatgreatnessispromisedthee.Layit
tothyheart,andfarewell.'
Glamisthouart,andCawdor;andshaltbe
Whatthouartpromised:yetdoIfearthynature;
Itistoofullo'themilkofhumankindness
Tocatchthenearestway:thouwouldstbegreat;
Artnotwithoutambition,butwithout
Theillnessshouldattendit:whatthouwouldsthighly,
Thatwouldstthouholily;wouldstnotplayfalse,
Andyetwouldstwronglywin:thou'ldsthave,greatGlamis,
Thatwhichcries'Thusthoumustdo,ifthouhaveit;
Andthatwhichratherthoudostfeartodo
Thanwishestshouldbeundone.'Hietheehither,
ThatImaypourmyspiritsinthineear;
Andchastisewiththevalourofmytongue
Allthatimpedestheefromthegoldenround,
Whichfateandmetaphysicalaiddothseem
Tohavetheecrown'dwithal.
Whatisyourtidings?
Thekingcomeshereto-night.
Thou'rtmadtosayit:
Isnotthymasterwithhim?who,were'tso,
Wouldhaveinform'dforpreparation.
Sopleaseyou,itistrue:ourthaneiscoming:
Oneofmyfellowshadthespeedofhim,
Who,almostdeadforbreath,hadscarcelymore
Thanwouldmakeuphismessage.
Givehimtending;
Hebringsgreatnews.
Theravenhimselfishoarse
ThatcroaksthefatalentranceofDuncan
Undermybattlements.Come,youspirits
Thattendonmortalthoughts,unsexmehere,
Andfillmefromthecrowntothetoetop-full
Ofdirestcruelty!makethickmyblood;
Stopuptheaccessandpassagetoremorse,
Thatnocompunctiousvisitingsofnature
Shakemyfellpurpose,norkeeppeacebetween
Theeffectandit!Cometomywoman'sbreasts,
Andtakemymilkforgall,youmurderingministers,
Whereverinyoursightlesssubstances
Youwaitonnature'smischief!Come,thicknight,
Andpalltheeinthedunnestsmokeofhell,
Thatmykeenknifeseenotthewounditmakes,
Norheavenpeepthroughtheblanketofthedark,
Tocry'Hold,hold!'
GreatGlamis!worthyCawdor!
Greaterthanboth,bytheall-hailhereafter!
Thylettershavetransportedmebeyond
Thisignorantpresent,andIfeelnow
Thefutureintheinstant.
Mydearestlove,
Duncancomeshereto-night.
Andwhengoeshence?
To-morrow,ashepurposes.
O,never
Shallsunthatmorrowsee!
Yourface,mythane,isasabookwheremen
Mayreadstrangematters.Tobeguilethetime,
Looklikethetime;bearwelcomeinyoureye,
Yourhand,yourtongue:lookliketheinnocentflower,
Butbetheserpentunder't.Hethat'scoming
Mustbeprovidedfor:andyoushallput
Thisnight'sgreatbusinessintomydispatch;
Whichshalltoallournightsanddaystocome
Givesolelysovereignswayandmasterdom.
Wewillspeakfurther.
Onlylookupclear;
Toalterfavoureveristofear:
Leavealltheresttome.
Thiscastlehathapleasantseat;theair
Nimblyandsweetlyrecommendsitself
Untoourgentlesenses.
Thisguestofsummer,
Thetemple-hauntingmartlet,doesapprove,
Byhislovedmansionry,thattheheaven'sbreath
Smellswooinglyhere:nojutty,frieze,
Buttress,norcoignofvantage,butthisbird
Hathmadehispendentbedandprocreantcradle:
Wheretheymostbreedandhaunt,Ihaveobserved,
Theairisdelicate.
See,see,ourhonour'dhostess!
Thelovethatfollowsussometimeisourtrouble,
Whichstillwethankaslove.HereinIteachyou
HowyoushallbidGod'ildusforyourpains,
Andthankusforyourtrouble.
Allourservice
Ineverypointtwicedoneandthendonedouble
Werepoorandsinglebusinesstocontend
Againstthosehonoursdeepandbroadwherewith
Yourmajestyloadsourhouse:forthoseofold,
Andthelatedignitiesheap'duptothem,
Werestyourhermits.
Where'sthethaneofCawdor?
Wecoursedhimattheheels,andhadapurpose
Tobehispurveyor:butherideswell;
Andhisgreatlove,sharpashisspur,hathholphim
Tohishomebeforeus.Fairandnoblehostess,
Weareyourguestto-night.
Yourservantsever
Havetheirs,themselvesandwhatistheirs,incompt,
Tomaketheirauditatyourhighness'pleasure,
Stilltoreturnyourown.
Givemeyourhand;
Conductmetominehost:welovehimhighly,
Andshallcontinueourgracestowardshim.
Byyourleave,hostess.
Ifitweredonewhen'tisdone,then'twerewell
Itweredonequickly:iftheassassination
Couldtrammeluptheconsequence,andcatch
Withhissurceasesuccess;thatbutthisblow
Mightbethebe-allandtheend-allhere,
Buthere,uponthisbankandshoaloftime,
We'ldjumpthelifetocome.Butinthesecases
Westillhavejudgmenthere;thatwebutteach
Bloodyinstructions,which,beingtaught,return
Toplaguetheinventor:thiseven-handedjustice
Commendstheingredientsofourpoison'dchalice
Toourownlips.He'shereindoubletrust;
First,asIamhiskinsmanandhissubject,
Strongbothagainstthedeed;then,ashishost,
Whoshouldagainsthismurderershutthedoor,
Notbeartheknifemyself.Besides,thisDuncan
Hathbornehisfacultiessomeek,hathbeen
Soclearinhisgreatoffice,thathisvirtues
Willpleadlikeangels,trumpet-tongued,against
Thedeepdamnationofhistaking-off;
Andpity,likeanakednew-bornbabe,
Stridingtheblast,orheaven'scherubim,horsed
Uponthesightlesscouriersoftheair,
Shallblowthehorriddeedineveryeye,
Thattearsshalldrownthewind.Ihavenospur
Toprickthesidesofmyintent,butonly
Vaultingambition,whicho'erleapsitself
Andfallsontheother.
Hownow!whatnews?
Hehasalmostsupp'd:whyhaveyouleftthechamber?
Hathheask'dforme?
Knowyounothehas?
Wewillproceednofurtherinthisbusiness:
Hehathhonour'dmeoflate;andIhavebought
Goldenopinionsfromallsortsofpeople,
Whichwouldbewornnowintheirnewestgloss,
Notcastasidesosoon.
Wasthehopedrunk
Whereinyoudress'dyourself?hathitsleptsince?
Andwakesitnow,tolooksogreenandpale
Atwhatitdidsofreely?Fromthistime
SuchIaccountthylove.Artthouafeard
Tobethesameinthineownactandvalour
Asthouartindesire?Wouldstthouhavethat
Whichthouesteem'sttheornamentoflife,
Andliveacowardinthineownesteem,
Letting'Idarenot'waitupon'Iwould,'
Likethepoorcati'theadage?
Prithee,peace:
Idaredoallthatmaybecomeaman;
Whodaresdomoreisnone.
Whatbeastwas't,then,
Thatmadeyoubreakthisenterprisetome?
Whenyoudurstdoit,thenyouwereaman;
And,tobemorethanwhatyouwere,youwould
Besomuchmoretheman.Nortimenorplace
Didthenadhere,andyetyouwouldmakeboth:
Theyhavemadethemselves,andthattheirfitnessnow
Doesunmakeyou.Ihavegivensuck,andknow
Howtender'tistolovethebabethatmilksme:
Iwould,whileitwassmilinginmyface,
Havepluck'dmynipplefromhisbonelessgums,
Anddash'dthebrainsout,hadIsoswornasyou
Havedonetothis.
Ifweshouldfail?
Wefail!
Butscrewyourcouragetothesticking-place,
Andwe'llnotfail.WhenDuncanisasleep--
Wheretotherathershallhisday'shardjourney
Soundlyinvitehim--histwochamberlains
WillIwithwineandwassailsoconvince
Thatmemory,thewarderofthebrain,
Shallbeafume,andthereceiptofreason
Alimbeckonly:wheninswinishsleep
Theirdrenchednatureslieasinadeath,
WhatcannotyouandIperformupon
TheunguardedDuncan?whatnotputupon
Hisspongyofficers,whoshallbeartheguilt
Ofourgreatquell?
Bringforthmen-childrenonly;
Forthyundauntedmettleshouldcompose
Nothingbutmales.Willitnotbereceived,
Whenwehavemark'dwithbloodthosesleepytwo
Ofhisownchamberandusedtheirverydaggers,
Thattheyhavedone't?
Whodaresreceiveitother,
Asweshallmakeourgriefsandclamourroar
Uponhisdeath?
Iamsettled,andbendup
Eachcorporalagenttothisterriblefeat.
Away,andmockthetimewithfairestshow:
Falsefacemusthidewhatthefalseheartdothknow.
Howgoesthenight,boy?
Themoonisdown;Ihavenotheardtheclock.
Andshegoesdownattwelve.
Itake't,'tislater,sir.
Hold,takemysword.There'shusbandryinheaven;
Theircandlesareallout.Taketheethattoo.
Aheavysummonslieslikeleaduponme,
AndyetIwouldnotsleep:mercifulpowers,
Restraininmethecursedthoughtsthatnature
Giveswaytoinrepose!
Givememysword.
Who'sthere?
Afriend.
What,sir,notyetatrest?Theking'sa-bed:
Hehathbeeninunusualpleasure,and
Sentforthgreatlargesstoyouroffices.
Thisdiamondhegreetsyourwifewithal,
Bythenameofmostkindhostess;andshutup
Inmeasurelesscontent.
Beingunprepared,
Ourwillbecametheservanttodefect;
Whichelseshouldfreehavewrought.
All'swell.
Idreamtlastnightofthethreeweirdsisters:
Toyoutheyhaveshow'dsometruth.
Ithinknotofthem:
Yet,whenwecanentreatanhourtoserve,
Wewouldspenditinsomewordsuponthatbusiness,
Ifyouwouldgrantthetime.
Atyourkind'stleisure.
Ifyoushallcleavetomyconsent,when'tis,
Itshallmakehonourforyou.
SoIlosenone
Inseekingtoaugmentit,butstillkeep
Mybosomfranchisedandallegianceclear,
Ishallbecounsell'd.
Goodreposethewhile!
Thanks,sir:theliketoyou!
Gobidthymistress,whenmydrinkisready,
Shestrikeuponthebell.Gettheetobed.
IsthisadaggerwhichIseebeforeme,
Thehandletowardmyhand?Come,letmeclutchthee.
Ihavetheenot,andyetIseetheestill.
Artthounot,fatalvision,sensible
Tofeelingastosight?orartthoubut
Adaggerofthemind,afalsecreation,
Proceedingfromtheheat-oppressedbrain?
Iseetheeyet,informaspalpable
AsthiswhichnowIdraw.
Thoumarshall'stmethewaythatIwasgoing;
AndsuchaninstrumentIwastouse.
Mineeyesaremadethefoolso'theothersenses,
Orelseworthalltherest;Iseetheestill,
Andonthybladeanddudgeongoutsofblood,
Whichwasnotsobefore.There'snosuchthing:
Itisthebloodybusinesswhichinforms
Thustomineeyes.Nowo'ertheonehalfworld
Natureseemsdead,andwickeddreamsabuse
Thecurtain'dsleep;witchcraftcelebrates
PaleHecate'sofferings,andwither'dmurder,
Alarum'dbyhissentinel,thewolf,
Whosehowl'shiswatch,thuswithhisstealthypace.
WithTarquin'sravishingstrides,towardshisdesign
Moveslikeaghost.Thousureandfirm-setearth,
Hearnotmysteps,whichwaytheywalk,forfear
Thyverystonesprateofmywhereabout,
Andtakethepresenthorrorfromthetime,
Whichnowsuitswithit.WhilesIthreat,helives:
Wordstotheheatofdeedstoocoldbreathgives.
Igo,anditisdone;thebellinvitesme.
Hearitnot,Duncan;foritisaknell
Thatsummonstheetoheavenortohell.
Thatwhichhathmadethemdrunkhathmademebold;
Whathathquench'dthemhathgivenmefire.
Hark!Peace!
Itwastheowlthatshriek'd,thefatalbellman,
Whichgivesthestern'stgood-night.Heisaboutit:
Thedoorsareopen;andthesurfeitedgrooms
Domocktheirchargewithsnores:Ihavedrugg'd
theirpossets,
Thatdeathandnaturedocontendaboutthem,
Whethertheyliveordie.
<STAGEDIR>Within</STAGEDIR>Who'sthere?what,ho!
Alack,Iamafraidtheyhaveawaked,
And'tisnotdone.Theattemptandnotthedeed
Confoundsus.Hark!Ilaidtheirdaggersready;
Hecouldnotmiss'em.Hadhenotresembled
Myfatherasheslept,Ihaddone't.
Myhusband!
Ihavedonethedeed.Didstthounothearanoise?
Iheardtheowlscreamandthecricketscry.
Didnotyouspeak?
When?
Now.
AsIdescended?
Ay.
Hark!
Wholiesi'thesecondchamber?
Donalbain.
Thisisasorrysight.
Afoolishthought,tosayasorrysight.
There'sonedidlaughin'ssleep,andonecried
'Murder!'
Thattheydidwakeeachother:Istoodandheardthem:
Buttheydidsaytheirprayers,andaddress'dthem
Againtosleep.
Therearetwolodgedtogether.
Onecried'Godblessus!'and'Amen'theother;
Astheyhadseenmewiththesehangman'shands.
Listeningtheirfear,Icouldnotsay'Amen,'
Whentheydidsay'Godblessus!'
Consideritnotsodeeply.
ButwhereforecouldnotIpronounce'Amen'?
Ihadmostneedofblessing,and'Amen'
Stuckinmythroat.
Thesedeedsmustnotbethought
Aftertheseways;so,itwillmakeusmad.
MethoughtIheardavoicecry'Sleepnomore!
Macbethdoesmurdersleep',theinnocentsleep,
Sleepthatknitsuptheravell'dsleeveofcare,
Thedeathofeachday'slife,sorelabour'sbath,
Balmofhurtminds,greatnature'ssecondcourse,
Chiefnourisherinlife'sfeast,--
Whatdoyoumean?
Stillitcried'Sleepnomore!'toallthehouse:
'Glamishathmurder'dsleep,andthereforeCawdor
Shallsleepnomore;Macbethshallsleepnomore.'
Whowasitthatthuscried?Why,worthythane,
Youdounbendyournoblestrength,tothink
Sobrainsicklyofthings.Gogetsomewater,
Andwashthisfilthywitnessfromyourhand.
Whydidyoubringthesedaggersfromtheplace?
Theymustliethere:gocarrythem;andsmear
Thesleepygroomswithblood.
I'llgonomore:
IamafraidtothinkwhatIhavedone;
Lookon'tagainIdarenot.
Infirmofpurpose!
Givemethedaggers:thesleepingandthedead
Arebutaspictures:'tistheeyeofchildhood
Thatfearsapainteddevil.Ifhedobleed,
I'llgildthefacesofthegroomswithal;
Foritmustseemtheirguilt.
Whenceisthatknocking?
Howis'twithme,wheneverynoiseappalsme?
Whathandsarehere?ha!theypluckoutmineeyes.
WillallgreatNeptune'soceanwashthisblood
Cleanfrommyhand?No,thismyhandwillrather
Themultitudinousseasinincarnadine,
Makingthegreenonered.
Myhandsareofyourcolour;butIshame
Towearaheartsowhite.
Ihearaknocking
Atthesouthentry:retirewetoourchamber;
Alittlewaterclearsusofthisdeed:
Howeasyisit,then!Yourconstancy
Hathleftyouunattended.
Hark!moreknocking.
Getonyournightgown,lestoccasioncallus,
Andshowustobewatchers.Benotlost
Sopoorlyinyourthoughts.
Toknowmydeed,'twerebestnotknowmyself.
WakeDuncanwiththyknocking!Iwouldthoucouldst!
Here'saknockingindeed!Ifa
manwereporterofhell-gate,heshouldhave
oldturningthekey.
Knock,
knock,knock!Who'sthere,i'thenameof
Beelzebub?Here'safarmer,thathanged
himselfontheexpectationofplenty:comein
time;havenapkinsenowaboutyou;here
you'llsweatfor't.
Knock,
knock!Who'sthere,intheotherdevil's
name?Faith,here'sanequivocator,thatcould
swearinboththescalesagainsteitherscale;
whocommittedtreasonenoughforGod'ssake,
yetcouldnotequivocatetoheaven:O,come
in,equivocator.
Knock,
knock,knock!Who'sthere?Faith,here'san
Englishtailorcomehither,forstealingoutof
aFrenchhose:comein,tailor;hereyoumay
roastyourgoose.
Knock,
knock;neveratquiet!Whatareyou?But
thisplaceistoocoldforhell.I'lldevil-porter
itnofurther:Ihadthoughttohaveletin
someofallprofessionsthatgotheprimrose
waytotheeverlastingbonfire.
Anon,anon!Iprayyou,remembertheporter.
Wasitsolate,friend,ereyouwenttobed,
Thatyoudoliesolate?
'Faithsir,wewerecarousingtillthe
secondcock:anddrink,sir,isagreat
provokerofthreethings.
Whatthreethingsdoesdrinkespeciallyprovoke?
Marry,sir,nose-painting,sleep,and
urine.Lechery,sir,itprovokes,andunprovokes;
itprovokesthedesire,butittakes
awaytheperformance:therefore,muchdrink
maybesaidtobeanequivocatorwithlechery:
itmakeshim,anditmarshim;itsets
himon,andittakeshimoff;itpersuadeshim,
anddisheartenshim;makeshimstandto,and
notstandto;inconclusion,equivocateshim
inasleep,and,givinghimthelie,leaveshim.
Ibelievedrinkgavetheethelielastnight.
Thatitdid,sir,i'theverythroaton
me:butIrequitedhimforhislie;and,I
think,beingtoostrongforhim,thoughhetook
upmylegssometime,yetImadeashifttocast
him.
Isthymasterstirring?
Ourknockinghasawakedhim;herehecomes.
Goodmorrow,noblesir.
Goodmorrow,both.
Isthekingstirring,worthythane?
Notyet.
Hedidcommandmetocalltimelyonhim:
Ihavealmostslipp'dthehour.
I'llbringyoutohim.
Iknowthisisajoyfultroubletoyou;
Butyet'tisone.
Thelabourwedelightinphysicspain.
Thisisthedoor.
I'llmakesoboldtocall,
For'tismylimitedservice.
Goesthekinghenceto-day?
Hedoes:hedidappointso.
Thenighthasbeenunruly:wherewelay,
Ourchimneyswereblowndown;and,astheysay,
Lamentingsheardi'theair;strangescreamsofdeath,
Andprophesyingwithaccentsterrible
Ofdirecombustionandconfusedevents
Newhatch'dtothewoefultime:theobscurebird
Clamour'dthelivelongnight:somesay,theearth
Wasfeverousanddidshake.
'Twasaroughnight.
Myyoungremembrancecannotparallel
Afellowtoit.
Ohorror,horror,horror!Tonguenorheart
Cannotconceivenornamethee!
What'sthematter.
Confusionnowhathmadehismasterpiece!
Mostsacrilegiousmurderhathbrokeope
TheLord'sanointedtemple,andstolethence
Thelifeo'thebuilding!
Whatis'tyousay?thelife?
Meanyouhismajesty?
Approachthechamber,anddestroyyoursight
WithanewGorgon:donotbidmespeak;
See,andthenspeakyourselves.
Awake,awake!
Ringthealarum-bell.Murderandtreason!
BanquoandDonalbain!Malcolm!awake!
Shakeoffthisdownysleep,death'scounterfeit,
Andlookondeathitself!up,up,andsee
Thegreatdoom'simage!Malcolm!Banquo!
Asfromyourgravesriseup,andwalklikesprites,
Tocountenancethishorror!Ringthebell.
What'sthebusiness,
Thatsuchahideoustrumpetcallstoparley
Thesleepersofthehouse?speak,speak!
Ogentlelady,
'TisnotforyoutohearwhatIcanspeak:
Therepetition,inawoman'sear,
Wouldmurderasitfell.
OBanquo,Banquo,
Ourroyalmaster'smurder'd!
Woe,alas!
What,inourhouse?
Toocruelanywhere.
DearDuff,Iprithee,contradictthyself,
Andsayitisnotso.
HadIbutdiedanhourbeforethischance,
Ihadlivedablessedtime;for,fromthisinstant,
There'snothingseriousinmortality:
Allisbuttoys:renownandgraceisdead;
Thewineoflifeisdrawn,andthemerelees
Isleftthisvaulttobragof.
Whatisamiss?
Youare,anddonotknow't:
Thespring,thehead,thefountainofyourblood
Isstopp'd;theverysourceofitisstopp'd.
Yourroyalfather'smurder'd.
O,bywhom?
Thoseofhischamber,asitseem'd,haddone't:
Theirhandsandfaceswereanbadgedwithblood;
Soweretheirdaggers,whichunwipedwefound
Upontheirpillows:
Theystared,andweredistracted;noman'slife
Wastobetrustedwiththem.
O,yetIdorepentmeofmyfury,
ThatIdidkillthem.
Whereforedidyouso?
Whocanbewise,amazed,temperateandfurious,
Loyalandneutral,inamoment?Noman:
Theexpeditionmyviolentlove
Outrunthepauser,reason.HerelayDuncan,
Hissilverskinlacedwithhisgoldenblood;
Andhisgash'dstabslook'dlikeabreachinnature
Forruin'swastefulentrance:there,themurderers,
Steep'dinthecoloursoftheirtrade,theirdaggers
Unmannerlybreech'dwithgore:whocouldrefrain,
Thathadahearttolove,andinthatheart
Couragetomake'sloveknown?
Helpmehence,ho!
Looktothelady.
<STAGEDIR>AsidetoDONALBAIN</STAGEDIR>Whydoweholdourtongues,
Thatmostmayclaimthisargumentforours?
<STAGEDIR>AsidetoMALCOLM</STAGEDIR>Whatshouldbespokenhere,
whereourfate,
Hidinanauger-hole,mayrush,andseizeus?
Let'saway;
Ourtearsarenotyetbrew'd.
<STAGEDIR>AsidetoDONALBAIN</STAGEDIR>Norourstrongsorrow
Uponthefootofmotion.
Looktothelady:
Andwhenwehaveournakedfrailtieshid,
Thatsufferinexposure,letusmeet,
Andquestionthismostbloodypieceofwork,
Toknowitfurther.Fearsandscruplesshakeus:
InthegreathandofGodIstand;andthence
AgainsttheundivulgedpretenceIfight
Oftreasonousmalice.
AndsodoI.
Soall.
Let'sbrieflyputonmanlyreadiness,
Andmeeti'thehalltogether.
Wellcontented.
Whatwillyoudo?Let'snotconsortwiththem:
Toshowanunfeltsorrowisanoffice
Whichthefalsemandoeseasy.I'lltoEngland.
ToIreland,I;ourseparatedfortune
Shallkeepusboththesafer:whereweare,
There'sdaggersinmen'ssmiles:thenearinblood,
Thenearerbloody.
Thismurderousshaftthat'sshot
Hathnotyetlighted,andoursafestway
Istoavoidtheaim.Therefore,tohorse;
Andletusnotbedaintyofleave-taking,
Butshiftaway:there'swarrantinthattheft
Whichstealsitself,whenthere'snomercyleft.
ThreescoreandtenIcanrememberwell:
WithinthevolumeofwhichtimeIhaveseen
Hoursdreadfulandthingsstrange;butthissorenight
Hathtrifledformerknowings.
Ah,goodfather,
Thouseest,theheavens,astroubledwithman'sact,
Threatenhisbloodystage:bytheclock,'tisday,
Andyetdarknightstranglesthetravellinglamp:
Is'tnight'spredominance,ortheday'sshame,
Thatdarknessdoesthefaceofearthentomb,
Whenlivinglightshouldkissit?
'Tisunnatural,
Evenlikethedeedthat'sdone.OnTuesdaylast,
Afalcon,toweringinherprideofplace,
Wasbyamousingowlhawk'datandkill'd.
AndDuncan'shorses--athingmoststrangeandcertain--
Beauteousandswift,theminionsoftheirrace,
Turn'dwildinnature,broketheirstalls,flungout,
Contending'gainstobedience,astheywouldmake
Warwithmankind.
'Tissaidtheyeateachother.
Theydidso,totheamazementofmineeyes
Thatlook'dupon't.HerecomesthegoodMacduff.
Howgoestheworld,sir,now?
Why,seeyounot?
Is'tknownwhodidthismorethanbloodydeed?
ThosethatMacbethhathslain.
Alas,theday!
Whatgoodcouldtheypretend?
Theyweresuborn'd:
MalcolmandDonalbain,theking'stwosons,
Arestol'nawayandfled;whichputsuponthem
Suspicionofthedeed.
'Gainstnaturestill!
Thriftlessambition,thatwiltravinup
Thineownlife'smeans!Then'tismostlike
ThesovereigntywillfalluponMacbeth.
Heisalreadynamed,andgonetoScone
Tobeinvested.
WhereisDuncan'sbody?
CarriedtoColmekill,
Thesacredstorehouseofhispredecessors,
Andguardianoftheirbones.
WillyoutoScone?
No,cousin,I'lltoFife.
Well,Iwillthither.
Well,mayyouseethingswelldonethere:adieu!
Lestouroldrobessiteasierthanournew!
Farewell,father.
God'sbenisongowithyou;andwiththose
Thatwouldmakegoodofbad,andfriendsoffoes!
Thouhastitnow:king,Cawdor,Glamis,all,
Astheweirdwomenpromised,and,Ifear,
Thouplay'dstmostfoullyfor't:yetitwassaid
Itshouldnotstandinthyposterity,
Butthatmyselfshouldbetherootandfather
Ofmanykings.Iftherecometruthfromthem--
Asuponthee,Macbeth,theirspeechesshine--
Why,bytheveritiesontheemadegood,
Maytheynotbemyoraclesaswell,
Andsetmeupinhope?Buthush!nomore.
Here'sourchiefguest.
Ifhehadbeenforgotten,
Ithadbeenasagapinourgreatfeast,
Andall-thingunbecoming.
To-nightweholdasolemnsuppersir,
AndI'llrequestyourpresence.
Letyourhighness
Commanduponme;tothewhichmyduties
Arewithamostindissolubletie
Foreverknit.
Rideyouthisafternoon?
Ay,mygoodlord.
Weshouldhaveelsedesiredyourgoodadvice,
Whichstillhathbeenbothgraveandprosperous,
Inthisday'scouncil;butwe'lltaketo-morrow.
Is'tfaryouride?
Asfar,mylord,aswillfillupthetime
'Twixtthisandsupper:gonotmyhorsethebetter,
Imustbecomeaborrowerofthenight
Foradarkhourortwain.
Failnotourfeast.
Mylord,Iwillnot.
Wehear,ourbloodycousinsarebestow'd
InEnglandandinIreland,notconfessing
Theircruelparricide,fillingtheirhearers
Withstrangeinvention:butofthatto-morrow,
Whentherewithalweshallhavecauseofstate
Cravingusjointly.Hieyoutohorse:adieu,
Tillyoureturnatnight.GoesFleancewithyou?
Ay,mygoodlord:ourtimedoescallupon's.
Iwishyourhorsesswiftandsureoffoot;
AndsoIdocommendyoutotheirbacks.Farewell.
Leteverymanbemasterofhistime
Tillsevenatnight:tomakesociety
Thesweeterwelcome,wewillkeepourself
Tillsupper-timealone:whilethen,Godbewithyou!
Sirrah,awordwithyou:attendthosemen
Ourpleasure?
Theyare,mylord,withoutthepalacegate.
Bringthembeforeus.
Tobethusisnothing;
Buttobesafelythus.--OurfearsinBanquo
Stickdeep;andinhisroyaltyofnature
Reignsthatwhichwouldbefear'd:'tismuchhedares;
And,tothatdauntlesstemperofhismind,
Hehathawisdomthatdothguidehisvalour
Toactinsafety.Thereisnonebuthe
WhosebeingIdofear:and,underhim,
MyGeniusisrebuked;as,itissaid,
MarkAntony'swasbyCaesar.Hechidthesisters
Whenfirsttheyputthenameofkinguponme,
Andbadethemspeaktohim:thenprophet-like
Theyhail'dhimfathertoalineofkings:
Uponmyheadtheyplacedafruitlesscrown,
Andputabarrensceptreinmygripe,
Thencetobewrench'dwithanunlinealhand,
Nosonofminesucceeding.If'tbeso,
ForBanquo'sissuehaveIfiledmymind;
ForthemthegraciousDuncanhaveImurder'd;
Putrancoursinthevesselofmypeace
Onlyforthem;andmineeternaljewel
Giventothecommonenemyofman,
Tomakethemkings,theseedofBanquokings!
Ratherthanso,comefateintothelist.
Andchampionmetotheutterance!Who'sthere!
Nowgotothedoor,andstaytheretillwecall.
Wasitnotyesterdaywespoketogether?
Itwas,sopleaseyourhighness.
Wellthen,now
Haveyouconsider'dofmyspeeches?Know
Thatitwasheinthetimespastwhichheldyou
Sounderfortune,whichyouthoughthadbeen
Ourinnocentself:thisImadegoodtoyou
Inourlastconference,pass'dinprobationwithyou,
Howyouwereborneinhand,howcross'd,
theinstruments,
Whowroughtwiththem,andallthingselsethatmight
Tohalfasoulandtoanotioncrazed
Say'ThusdidBanquo.'
Youmadeitknowntous.
Ididso,andwentfurther,whichisnow
Ourpointofsecondmeeting.Doyoufind
Yourpatiencesopredominantinyournature
Thatyoucanletthisgo?Areyousogospell'd
Toprayforthisgoodmanandforhisissue,
Whoseheavyhandhathbow'dyoutothegrave
Andbeggar'dyoursforever?
Wearemen,myliege.
Ay,inthecatalogueyegoformen;
Ashoundsandgreyhounds,mongrels,spaniels,curs,
Shoughs,water-rugsanddemi-wolves,areclept
Allbythenameofdogs:thevaluedfile
Distinguishestheswift,theslow,thesubtle,
Thehousekeeper,thehunter,everyone
Accordingtothegiftwhichbounteousnature
Hathinhimclosed;wherebyhedoesreceive
Particularaddition.fromthebill
Thatwritesthemallalike:andsoofmen.
Now,ifyouhaveastationinthefile,
Noti'theworstrankofmanhood,say't;
AndIwillputthatbusinessinyourbosoms,
Whoseexecutiontakesyourenemyoff,
Grapplesyoutotheheartandloveofus,
Whowearourhealthbutsicklyinhislife,
Whichinhisdeathwereperfect.
Iamone,myliege,
Whomthevileblowsandbuffetsoftheworld
HavesoincensedthatIamrecklesswhat
Idotospitetheworld.
AndIanother
Sowearywithdisasters,tugg'dwithfortune,
ThatIwouldsetmylieonanychance,
Tomendit,orberidon't.
Bothofyou
KnowBanquowasyourenemy.
True,mylord.
Soishemine;andinsuchbloodydistance,
Thateveryminuteofhisbeingthrusts
Againstmynear'stoflife:andthoughIcould
Withbarefacedpowersweephimfrommysight
Andbidmywillavouchit,yetImustnot,
Forcertainfriendsthatarebothhisandmine,
WhoselovesImaynotdrop,butwailhisfall
WhoImyselfstruckdown;andthenceitis,
ThatItoyourassistancedomakelove,
Maskingthebusinessfromthecommoneye
Forsundryweightyreasons.
Weshall,mylord,
Performwhatyoucommandus.
Thoughourlives--
Yourspiritsshinethroughyou.Withinthishouratmost
Iwilladviseyouwheretoplantyourselves;
Acquaintyouwiththeperfectspyo'thetime,
Themomenton't;for'tmustbedoneto-night,
Andsomethingfromthepalace;alwaysthought
ThatIrequireaclearness:andwithhim--
Toleavenorubsnorbotchesinthework--
Fleancehisson,thatkeepshimcompany,
Whoseabsenceisnolessmaterialtome
Thanishisfather's,mustembracethefate
Ofthatdarkhour.Resolveyourselvesapart:
I'llcometoyouanon.
Weareresolved,mylord.
I'llcalluponyoustraight:abidewithin.
Itisconcluded.Banquo,thysoul'sflight,
Ifitfindheaven,mustfinditoutto-night.
IsBanquogonefromcourt?
Ay,madam,butreturnsagainto-night.
Saytotheking,Iwouldattendhisleisure
Forafewwords.
Madam,Iwill.
Nought'shad,all'sspent,
Whereourdesireisgotwithoutcontent:
'Tissafertobethatwhichwedestroy
Thanbydestructiondwellindoubtfuljoy.
Hownow,mylord!whydoyoukeepalone,
Ofsorriestfanciesyourcompanionsmaking,
Usingthosethoughtswhichshouldindeedhavedied
Withthemtheythinkon?Thingswithoutallremedy
Shouldbewithoutregard:what'sdoneisdone.
Wehavescotch'dthesnake,notkill'dit:
She'llcloseandbeherself,whilstourpoormalice
Remainsindangerofherformertooth.
Butlettheframeofthingsdisjoint,boththe
worldssuffer,
Erewewilleatourmealinfearandsleep
Intheafflictionoftheseterribledreams
Thatshakeusnightly:betterbewiththedead,
Whomwe,togainourpeace,havesenttopeace,
Thanonthetortureofthemindtolie
Inrestlessecstasy.Duncanisinhisgrave;
Afterlife'sfitfulfeverhesleepswell;
Treasonhasdonehisworst:norsteel,norpoison,
Malicedomestic,foreignlevy,nothing,
Cantouchhimfurther.
Comeon;
Gentlemylord,sleeko'eryourruggedlooks;
Bebrightandjovialamongyourgueststo-night.
SoshallI,love;andso,Ipray,beyou:
LetyourremembranceapplytoBanquo;
Presenthimeminence,bothwitheyeandtongue:
Unsafethewhile,thatwe
Mustlaveourhonoursintheseflatteringstreams,
Andmakeourfacesvizardstoourhearts,
Disguisingwhattheyare.
Youmustleavethis.
O,fullofscorpionsismymind,dearwife!
Thouknow'stthatBanquo,andhisFleance,lives.
Butinthemnature'scopy'snoteterne.
There'scomfortyet;theyareassailable;
Thenbethoujocund:erethebathathflown
Hiscloister'dflight,eretoblackHecate'ssummons
Theshard-bornebeetlewithhisdrowsyhums
Hathrungnight'syawningpeal,thereshallbedone
Adeedofdreadfulnote.
What'stobedone?
Beinnocentoftheknowledge,dearestchuck,
Tillthouapplaudthedeed.Come,seelingnight,
Scarfupthetendereyeofpitifulday;
Andwiththybloodyandinvisiblehand
Cancelandteartopiecesthatgreatbond
Whichkeepsmepale!Lightthickens;andthecrow
Makeswingtotherookywood:
Goodthingsofdaybegintodroopanddrowse;
Whilenight'sblackagentstotheirpreysdorouse.
Thoumarvell'statmywords:butholdtheestill;
Thingsbadbegunmakestrongthemselvesbyill.
So,prithee,gowithme.
Butwhodidbidtheejoinwithus?
Macbeth.
Heneedsnotourmistrust,sincehedelivers
Ourofficesandwhatwehavetodo
Tothedirectionjust.
Thenstandwithus.
Thewestyetglimmerswithsomestreaksofday:
Nowspursthelatedtravellerapace
Togainthetimelyinn;andnearapproaches
Thesubjectofourwatch.
Hark!Ihearhorses.
<STAGEDIR>Within</STAGEDIR>Giveusalightthere,ho!
Then'tishe:therest
Thatarewithinthenoteofexpectation
Alreadyarei'thecourt.
Hishorsesgoabout.
Almostamile:buthedoesusually,
Soallmendo,fromhencetothepalacegate
Makeittheirwalk.
Alight,alight!
'Tishe.
Standto't.
Itwillberainto-night.
Letitcomedown.
O,treachery!Fly,goodFleance,fly,fly,fly!
Thoumaystrevenge.Oslave!
Whodidstrikeoutthelight?
Wastnottheway?
There'sbutonedown;thesonisfled.
Wehavelost
Besthalfofouraffair.
Well,let'saway,andsayhowmuchisdone.
Youknowyourowndegrees;sitdown:atfirst
Andlasttheheartywelcome.
Thankstoyourmajesty.
Ourselfwillminglewithsociety,
Andplaythehumblehost.
Ourhostesskeepsherstate,butinbesttime
Wewillrequireherwelcome.
Pronounceitforme,sir,toallourfriends;
Formyheartspeakstheyarewelcome.
See,theyencountertheewiththeirhearts'thanks.
Bothsidesareeven:hereI'llsiti'themidst:
Belargeinmirth;anonwe'lldrinkameasure
Thetableround.
There'sbloodonthyface.
'TisBanquo'sthen.
'Tisbettertheewithoutthanhewithin.
Ishedispatch'd?
Mylord,histhroatiscut;thatIdidforhim.
Thouartthebesto'thecut-throats:yethe'sgood
ThatdidthelikeforFleance:ifthoudidstit,
Thouartthenonpareil.
Mostroyalsir,
Fleanceis'scaped.
Thencomesmyfitagain:Ihadelsebeenperfect,
Wholeasthemarble,foundedastherock,
Asbroadandgeneralasthecasingair:
ButnowIamcabin'd,cribb'd,confined,boundin
Tosaucydoubtsandfears.ButBanquo'ssafe?
Ay,mygoodlord:safeinaditchhebides,
Withtwentytrenchedgashesonhishead;
Theleastadeathtonature.
Thanksforthat:
Therethegrownserpentlies;thewormthat'sfled
Hathnaturethatintimewillvenombreed,
Noteethforthepresent.Gettheegone:to-morrow
We'llhear,ourselves,again.
Myroyallord,
Youdonotgivethecheer:thefeastissold
Thatisnotoftenvouch'd,while'tisa-making,
'Tisgivenwithwelcome:tofeedwerebestathome;
Fromthencethesaucetomeatisceremony;
Meetingwerebarewithoutit.
Sweetremembrancer!
Now,gooddigestionwaitonappetite,
Andhealthonboth!
May'tpleaseyourhighnesssit.
Herehadwenowourcountry'shonourroof'd,
WerethegracedpersonofourBanquopresent;
WhomayIratherchallengeforunkindness
Thanpityformischance!
Hisabsence,sir,
Laysblameuponhispromise.Please'tyourhighness
Tograceuswithyourroyalcompany.
Thetable'sfull.
Hereisaplacereserved,sir.
Where?
Here,mygoodlord.Whatis'tthatmovesyourhighness?
Whichofyouhavedonethis?
What,mygoodlord?
ThoucanstnotsayIdidit:nevershake
Thygorylocksatme.
Gentlemen,rise:hishighnessisnotwell.
Sit,worthyfriends:mylordisoftenthus,
Andhathbeenfromhisyouth:prayyou,keepseat;
Thefitismomentary;uponathought
Hewillagainbewell:ifmuchyounotehim,
Youshalloffendhimandextendhispassion:
Feed,andregardhimnot.Areyouaman?
Ay,andaboldone,thatdarelookonthat
Whichmightappalthedevil.
Oproperstuff!
Thisistheverypaintingofyourfear:
Thisistheair-drawndaggerwhich,yousaid,
LedyoutoDuncan.O,theseflawsandstarts,
Impostorstotruefear,wouldwellbecome
Awoman'sstoryatawinter'sfire,
Authorizedbyhergrandam.Shameitself!
Whydoyoumakesuchfaces?Whenall'sdone,
Youlookbutonastool.
Prithee,seethere!behold!look!lo!
howsayyou?
Why,whatcareI?Ifthoucanstnod,speaktoo.
Ifcharnel-housesandourgravesmustsend
Thosethatweburyback,ourmonuments
Shallbethemawsofkites.
What,quiteunmann'dinfolly?
IfIstandhere,Isawhim.
Fie,forshame!
Bloodhathbeenshederenow,i'theoldentime,
Erehumanstatutepurgedthegentleweal;
Ay,andsincetoo,murdershavebeenperform'd
Tooterriblefortheear:thetimeshavebeen,
That,whenthebrainswereout,themanwoulddie,
Andthereanend;butnowtheyriseagain,
Withtwentymortalmurdersontheircrowns,
Andpushusfromourstools:thisismorestrange
Thansuchamurderis.
Myworthylord,
Yournoblefriendsdolackyou.
Idoforget.
Donotmuseatme,mymostworthyfriends,
Ihaveastrangeinfirmity,whichisnothing
Tothosethatknowme.Come,loveandhealthtoall;
ThenI'llsitdown.Givemesomewine;fillfull.
Idrinktothegeneraljoyo'thewholetable,
AndtoourdearfriendBanquo,whomwemiss;
Wouldhewerehere!toall,andhim,wethirst,
Andalltoall.
Ourduties,andthepledge.
Avaunt!andquitmysight!lettheearthhidethee!
Thybonesaremarrowless,thybloodiscold;
Thouhastnospeculationinthoseeyes
Whichthoudostglarewith!
Thinkofthis,goodpeers,
Butasathingofcustom:'tisnoother;
Onlyitspoilsthepleasureofthetime.
Whatmandare,Idare:
ApproachthouliketheruggedRussianbear,
Thearm'drhinoceros,ortheHyrcantiger;
Takeanyshapebutthat,andmyfirmnerves
Shallnevertremble:orbealiveagain,
Anddaremetothedesertwiththysword;
IftremblingIinhabitthen,protestme
Thebabyofagirl.Hence,horribleshadow!
Unrealmockery,hence!
Why,so:beinggone,
Iamamanagain.Prayyou,sitstill.
Youhavedisplacedthemirth,brokethegoodmeeting,
Withmostadmireddisorder.
Cansuchthingsbe,
Andovercomeuslikeasummer'scloud,
Withoutourspecialwonder?Youmakemestrange
EventothedispositionthatIowe,
WhennowIthinkyoucanbeholdsuchsights,
Andkeepthenaturalrubyofyourcheeks,
Whenmineisblanchedwithfear.
Whatsights,mylord?
Iprayyou,speaknot;hegrowsworseandworse;
Questionenrageshim.Atonce,goodnight:
Standnotupontheorderofyourgoing,
Butgoatonce.
Goodnight;andbetterhealth
Attendhismajesty!
Akindgoodnighttoall!
Itwillhaveblood;theysay,bloodwillhaveblood:
Stoneshavebeenknowntomoveandtreestospeak;
Augursandunderstoodrelationshave
Bymagot-piesandchoughsandrooksbroughtforth
Thesecret'stmanofblood.Whatisthenight?
Almostatoddswithmorning,whichiswhich.
Howsay'stthou,thatMacduffdenieshisperson
Atourgreatbidding?
Didyousendtohim,sir?
Ihearitbytheway;butIwillsend:
There'snotaoneofthembutinhishouse
Ikeepaservantfee'd.Iwillto-morrow,
AndbetimesIwill,totheweirdsisters:
Moreshalltheyspeak;fornowIambenttoknow,
Bytheworstmeans,theworst.Formineowngood,
Allcausesshallgiveway:Iaminblood
Stepp'dinsofarthat,shouldIwadenomore,
Returningwereastediousasgoo'er:
StrangethingsIhaveinhead,thatwilltohand;
Whichmustbeactederetheymaybescann'd.
Youlacktheseasonofallnatures,sleep.
Come,we'lltosleep.Mystrangeandself-abuse
Istheinitiatefearthatwantsharduse:
Weareyetbutyoungindeed.
Why,hownow,Hecate!youlookangerly.
HaveInotreason,beldamsasyouare,
Saucyandoverbold?Howdidyoudare
TotradeandtrafficwithMacbeth
Inriddlesandaffairsofdeath;
AndI,themistressofyourcharms,
Theclosecontriverofallharms,
Wasnevercall'dtobearmypart,
Orshowthegloryofourart?
And,whichisworse,allyouhavedone
Hathbeenbutforawaywardson,
Spitefulandwrathful,who,asothersdo,
Lovesforhisownends,notforyou.
Butmakeamendsnow:getyougone,
AndatthepitofAcheron
Meetmei'themorning:thitherhe
Willcometoknowhisdestiny:
Yourvesselsandyourspellsprovide,
Yourcharmsandeverythingbeside.
Iamfortheair;thisnightI'llspend
Untoadismalandafatalend:
Greatbusinessmustbewroughterenoon:
Uponthecornerofthemoon
Therehangsavaporousdropprofound;
I'llcatchitereitcometoground:
Andthatdistill'dbymagicsleights
Shallraisesuchartificialsprites
Asbythestrengthoftheirillusion
Shalldrawhimontohisconfusion:
Heshallspurnfate,scorndeath,andbear
Hehopes'bovewisdom,graceandfear:
Andyouallknow,security
Ismortals'chiefestenemy.
Hark!Iamcall'd;mylittlespirit,see,
Sitsinafoggycloud,andstaysforme.
Come,let'smakehaste;she'llsoonbebackagain.
Myformerspeecheshavebuthityourthoughts,
Whichcaninterpretfurther:only,Isay,
Thingshavebeenstrangelyborne.The
graciousDuncan
WaspitiedofMacbeth:marry,hewasdead:
Andtheright-valiantBanquowalk'dtoolate;
Whom,youmaysay,if'tpleaseyou,Fleancekill'd,
ForFleancefled:menmustnotwalktoolate.
Whocannotwantthethoughthowmonstrous
ItwasforMalcolmandforDonalbain
Tokilltheirgraciousfather?damnedfact!
HowitdidgrieveMacbeth!didhenotstraight
Inpiousragethetwodelinquentstear,
Thatweretheslavesofdrinkandthrallsofsleep?
Wasnotthatnoblydone?Ay,andwiselytoo;
For'twouldhaveanger'danyheartalive
Tohearthemendeny't.Sothat,Isay,
Hehasborneallthingswell:andIdothink
ThathadheDuncan'ssonsunderhiskey--
As,an'tpleaseheaven,heshallnot--they
shouldfind
What'tweretokillafather;soshouldFleance.
But,peace!forfrombroadwordsand'causehefail'd
Hispresenceatthetyrant'sfeast,Ihear
Macdufflivesindisgrace:sir,canyoutell
Wherehebestowshimself?
ThesonofDuncan,
Fromwhomthistyrantholdsthedueofbirth
LivesintheEnglishcourt,andisreceived
OfthemostpiousEdwardwithsuchgrace
Thatthemalevolenceoffortunenothing
Takesfromhishighrespect:thitherMacduff
Isgonetopraytheholyking,uponhisaid
TowakeNorthumberlandandwarlikeSiward:
That,bythehelpofthese--withHimabove
Toratifythework--wemayagain
Givetoourtablesmeat,sleeptoournights,
Freefromourfeastsandbanquetsbloodyknives,
Dofaithfulhomageandreceivefreehonours:
Allwhichwepinefornow:andthisreport
Hathsoexasperatethekingthathe
Preparesforsomeattemptofwar.
SenthetoMacduff?
Hedid:andwithanabsolute'Sir,notI,'
Thecloudymessengerturnsmehisback,
Andhums,aswhoshouldsay'You'llruethetime
Thatclogsmewiththisanswer.'
Andthatwellmight
Advisehimtoacaution,toholdwhatdistance
Hiswisdomcanprovide.Someholyangel
FlytothecourtofEnglandandunfold
Hismessageerehecome,thataswiftblessing
Maysoonreturntothisoursufferingcountry
Underahandaccursed!
I'llsendmyprayerswithhim.
Thricethebrindedcathathmew'd.
Thriceandoncethehedge-pigwhined.
Harpiercries'Tistime,'tistime.
Roundaboutthecauldrongo;
Inthepoison'dentrailsthrow.
Toad,thatundercoldstone
Daysandnightshasthirty-one
Swelter'dvenomsleepinggot,
Boilthoufirsti'thecharmedpot.
Double,doubletoilandtrouble;
Fireburn,andcauldronbubble.
Filletofafennysnake,
Inthecauldronboilandbake;
Eyeofnewtandtoeoffrog,
Woolofbatandtongueofdog,
Adder'sforkandblind-worm'ssting,
Lizard'slegandowlet'swing,
Foracharmofpowerfultrouble,
Likeahell-brothboilandbubble.
Double,doubletoilandtrouble;
Fireburnandcauldronbubble.
Scaleofdragon,toothofwolf,
Witches'mummy,mawandgulf
Oftheravin'dsalt-seashark,
Rootofhemlockdigg'di'thedark,
LiverofblasphemingJew,
Gallofgoat,andslipsofyew
Silver'dinthemoon'seclipse,
NoseofTurkandTartar'slips,
Fingerofbirth-strangledbabe
Ditch-deliver'dbyadrab,
Makethegruelthickandslab:
Addtheretoatiger'schaudron,
Fortheingredientsofourcauldron.
Double,doubletoilandtrouble;
Fireburnandcauldronbubble.
Coolitwithababoon'sblood,
Thenthecharmisfirmandgood.
Owelldone!Icommendyourpains;
Andeveryoneshallsharei'thegains;
Andnowaboutthecauldronsing,
Liveelvesandfairiesinaring,
Enchantingallthatyouputin.
Bytheprickingofmythumbs,
Somethingwickedthiswaycomes.
Open,locks,
Whoeverknocks!
Hownow,yousecret,black,andmidnighthags!
Whatis'tyoudo?
Adeedwithoutaname.
Iconjureyou,bythatwhichyouprofess,
Howe'eryoucometoknowit,answerme:
Thoughyouuntiethewindsandletthemfight
Againstthechurches;thoughtheyestywaves
Confoundandswallownavigationup;
Thoughbladedcornbelodgedandtreesblowndown;
Thoughcastlestoppleontheirwarders'heads;
Thoughpalacesandpyramidsdoslope
Theirheadstotheirfoundations;thoughthetreasure
Ofnature'sgermenstumblealltogether,
Eventilldestructionsicken;answerme
TowhatIaskyou.
Speak.
Demand.
We'llanswer.
Say,ifthou'dstratherhearitfromourmouths,
Orfromourmasters?
Call'em;letmesee'em.
Pourinsow'sblood,thathatheaten
Herninefarrow;greasethat'ssweaten
Fromthemurderer'sgibbetthrow
Intotheflame.
Come,highorlow;
Thyselfandofficedeftlyshow!
Tellme,thouunknownpower,--
Heknowsthythought:
Hearhisspeech,butsaythounought.
Macbeth!Macbeth!Macbeth!bewareMacduff;
BewarethethaneofFife.Dismissme.Enough.
Whate'erthouart,forthygoodcaution,thanks;
Thouhastharp'dmyfeararight:butone
wordmore,--
Hewillnotbecommanded:here'sanother,
Morepotentthanthefirst.
Macbeth!Macbeth!Macbeth!
HadIthreeears,I'ldhearthee.
Bebloody,bold,andresolute;laughtoscorn
Thepowerofman,fornoneofwomanborn
ShallharmMacbeth.
Thenlive,Macduff:whatneedIfearofthee?
ButyetI'llmakeassurancedoublesure,
Andtakeabondoffate:thoushaltnotlive;
ThatImaytellpale-heartedfearitlies,
Andsleepinspiteofthunder.
Whatisthis
Thatrisesliketheissueofaking,
Andwearsuponhisbaby-browtheround
Andtopofsovereignty?
Listen,butspeaknotto't.
Belion-mettled,proud;andtakenocare
Whochafes,whofrets,orwhereconspirersare:
Macbethshallnevervanquish'dbeuntil
GreatBirnamwoodtohighDunsinanehill
Shallcomeagainsthim.
Thatwillneverbe
Whocanimpresstheforest,bidthetree
Unfixhisearth-boundroot?Sweetbodements!good!
Rebellion'shead,risenevertillthewood
OfBirnamrise,andourhigh-placedMacbeth
Shalllivetheleaseofnature,payhisbreath
Totimeandmortalcustom.Yetmyheart
Throbstoknowonething:tellme,ifyourart
Cantellsomuch:shallBanquo'sissueever
Reigninthiskingdom?
Seektoknownomore.
Iwillbesatisfied:denymethis,
Andaneternalcursefallonyou!Letmeknow.
Whysinksthatcauldron?andwhatnoiseisthis?
Show!
Show!
Show!
Showhiseyes,andgrievehisheart;
Comelikeshadows,sodepart!
ThouarttoolikethespiritofBanquo:down!
Thycrowndoessearmineeye-balls.Andthyhair,
Thouothergold-boundbrow,islikethefirst.
Athirdisliketheformer.Filthyhags!
Whydoyoushowmethis?Afourth!Start,eyes!
What,willthelinestretchouttothecrackofdoom?
Anotheryet!Aseventh!I'llseenomore:
Andyettheeighthappears,whobearsaglass
Whichshowsmemanymore;andsomeIsee
Thattwo-foldballsandtreblescepterscarry:
Horriblesight!Now,Isee,'tistrue;
Fortheblood-bolter'dBanquosmilesuponme,
Andpointsatthemforhis.
What,isthisso?
Ay,sir,allthisisso:butwhy
StandsMacbeththusamazedly?
Come,sisters,cheerweuphissprites,
Andshowthebestofourdelights:
I'llcharmtheairtogiveasound,
Whileyouperformyouranticround:
Thatthisgreatkingmaykindlysay,
Ourdutiesdidhiswelcomepay.
Wherearethey?Gone?Letthispernicioushour
Standayeaccursedinthecalendar!
Comein,withoutthere!
What'syourgrace'swill?
Sawyoutheweirdsisters?
No,mylord.
Cametheynotbyyou?
No,indeed,mylord.
Infectedbetheairwhereontheyride;
Anddamn'dallthosethattrustthem!Ididhear
Thegallopingofhorse:whowas'tcameby?
'Tistwoorthree,mylord,thatbringyouword
MacduffisfledtoEngland.
FledtoEngland!
Ay,mygoodlord.
Time,thouanticipatestmydreadexploits:
Theflightypurposeneveriso'ertook
Unlessthedeedgowithit;fromthismoment
Theveryfirstlingsofmyheartshallbe
Thefirstlingsofmyhand.Andevennow,
Tocrownmythoughtswithacts,beitthoughtanddone:
ThecastleofMacduffIwillsurprise;
SeizeuponFife;givetotheedgeo'thesword
Hiswife,hisbabes,andallunfortunatesouls
Thattracehiminhisline.Noboastinglikeafool;
ThisdeedI'lldobeforethispurposecool.
Butnomoresights!--Wherearethesegentlemen?
Come,bringmewheretheyare.
Whathadhedone,tomakehimflytheland?
Youmusthavepatience,madam.
Hehadnone:
Hisflightwasmadness:whenouractionsdonot,
Ourfearsdomakeustraitors.
Youknownot
Whetheritwashiswisdomorhisfear.
Wisdom!toleavehiswife,toleavehisbabes,
Hismansionandhistitlesinaplace
Fromwhencehimselfdoesfly?Helovesusnot;
Hewantsthenaturaltouch:forthepoorwren,
Themostdiminutiveofbirds,willfight,
Heryoungonesinhernest,againsttheowl.
Allisthefearandnothingisthelove;
Aslittleisthewisdom,wheretheflight
Sorunsagainstallreason.
Mydearestcoz,
Iprayyou,schoolyourself:butforyourhusband,
Heisnoble,wise,judicious,andbestknows
Thefitso'theseason.Idarenotspeak
muchfurther;
Butcruelarethetimes,whenwearetraitors
Anddonotknowourselves,whenweholdrumour
Fromwhatwefear,yetknownotwhatwefear,
Butfloatuponawildandviolentsea
Eachwayandmove.Itakemyleaveofyou:
ShallnotbelongbutI'llbehereagain:
Thingsattheworstwillcease,orelseclimbupward
Towhattheywerebefore.Myprettycousin,
Blessinguponyou!
Father'dheis,andyethe'sfatherless.
Iamsomuchafool,shouldIstaylonger,
Itwouldbemydisgraceandyourdiscomfort:
Itakemyleaveatonce.
Sirrah,yourfather'sdead;
Andwhatwillyoudonow?Howwillyoulive?
Asbirdsdo,mother.
What,withwormsandflies?
WithwhatIget,Imean;andsodothey.
Poorbird!thou'ldstneverfearthenetnorlime,
Thepitfallnorthegin.
WhyshouldI,mother?Poorbirdstheyarenotsetfor.
Myfatherisnotdead,forallyoursaying.
Yes,heisdead;howwiltthoudoforafather?
Nay,howwillyoudoforahusband?
Why,Icanbuymetwentyatanymarket.
Thenyou'llbuy'emtosellagain.
Thouspeak'stwithallthywit:andyet,i'faith,
Withwitenoughforthee.
Wasmyfatheratraitor,mother?
Ay,thathewas.
Whatisatraitor?
Why,onethatswearsandlies.
Andbealltraitorsthatdoso?
Everyonethatdoessoisatraitor,andmustbehanged.
Andmusttheyallbehangedthatswearandlie?
Everyone.
Whomusthangthem?
Why,thehonestmen.
Thentheliarsandswearersarefools,
forthereareliarsandswearersenowtobeat
thehonestmenandhangupthem.
Now,Godhelpthee,poormonkey!
Buthowwiltthoudoforafather?
Ifheweredead,you'ldweepfor
him:ifyouwouldnot,itwereagoodsign
thatIshouldquicklyhaveanewfather.
Poorprattler,howthoutalk'st!
Blessyou,fairdame!Iamnottoyouknown,
ThoughinyourstateofhonourIamperfect.
Idoubtsomedangerdoesapproachyounearly:
Ifyouwilltakeahomelyman'sadvice,
Benotfoundhere;hence,withyourlittleones.
Tofrightyouthus,methinks,Iamtoosavage;
Todoworsetoyouwerefellcruelty,
Whichistoonighyourperson.Heavenpreserveyou!
Idareabidenolonger.
WhithershouldIfly?
Ihavedonenoharm.ButIremembernow
Iaminthisearthlyworld;wheretodoharm
Isoftenlaudable,todogoodsometime
Accounteddangerousfolly:whythen,alas,
DoIputupthatwomanlydefence,
TosayIhavedonenoharm?
Whatarethesefaces?
Whereisyourhusband?
Ihope,innoplacesounsanctified
Wheresuchasthoumaystfindhim.
He'satraitor.
Thouliest,thoushag-hair'dvillain!
What,youegg!
Youngfryoftreachery!
Hehaskill'dme,mother:
Runaway,Iprayyou!
Letusseekoutsomedesolateshade,andthere
Weepoursadbosomsempty.
Letusrather
Holdfastthemortalsword,andlikegoodmen
Bestrideourdown-fall'nbirthdom:eachnewmorn
Newwidowshowl,neworphanscry,newsorrows
Strikeheavenontheface,thatitresounds
AsifitfeltwithScotlandandyell'dout
Likesyllableofdolour.
WhatIbelieveI'llwail,
Whatknowbelieve,andwhatIcanredress,
AsIshallfindthetimetofriend,Iwill.
Whatyouhavespoke,itmaybesoperchance.
Thistyrant,whosesolenameblistersourtongues,
Wasoncethoughthonest:youhavelovedhimwell.
Hehathnottouch'dyouyet.Iamyoung;
butsomething
Youmaydeserveofhimthroughme,andwisdom
Toofferupaweakpoorinnocentlamb
Toappeaseanangrygod.
Iamnottreacherous.
ButMacbethis.
Agoodandvirtuousnaturemayrecoil
Inanimperialcharge.ButIshallcrave
yourpardon;
Thatwhichyouaremythoughtscannottranspose:
Angelsarebrightstill,thoughthebrightestfell;
Thoughallthingsfoulwouldwearthebrowsofgrace,
Yetgracemuststilllookso.
Ihavelostmyhopes.
PerchanceeventherewhereIdidfindmydoubts.
Whyinthatrawnessleftyouwifeandchild,
Thosepreciousmotives,thosestrongknotsoflove,
Withoutleave-taking?Iprayyou,
Letnotmyjealousiesbeyourdishonours,
Butmineownsafeties.Youmayberightlyjust,
WhateverIshallthink.
Bleed,bleed,poorcountry!
Greattyranny!laythouthybasissure,
Forgoodnessdarenotchequethee:wearthou
thywrongs;
Thetitleisaffeer'd!Faretheewell,lord:
Iwouldnotbethevillainthatthouthink'st
Forthewholespacethat'sinthetyrant'sgrasp,
AndtherichEasttoboot.
Benotoffended:
Ispeaknotasinabsolutefearofyou.
Ithinkourcountrysinksbeneaththeyoke;
Itweeps,itbleeds;andeachnewdayagash
Isaddedtoherwounds:Ithinkwithal
Therewouldbehandsupliftedinmyright;
AndherefromgraciousEnglandhaveIoffer
Ofgoodlythousands:but,forallthis,
WhenIshalltreaduponthetyrant'shead,
Orwearitonmysword,yetmypoorcountry
Shallhavemorevicesthanithadbefore,
Moresufferandmoresundrywaysthanever,
Byhimthatshallsucceed.
Whatshouldhebe?
ItismyselfImean:inwhomIknow
Alltheparticularsofvicesografted
That,whentheyshallbeopen'd,blackMacbeth
Willseemaspureassnow,andthepoorstate
Esteemhimasalamb,beingcompared
Withmyconfinelessharms.
Notinthelegions
Ofhorridhellcancomeadevilmoredamn'd
InevilstotopMacbeth.
Igranthimbloody,
Luxurious,avaricious,false,deceitful,
Sudden,malicious,smackingofeverysin
Thathasaname:butthere'snobottom,none,
Inmyvoluptuousness:yourwives,yourdaughters,
Yourmatronsandyourmaids,couldnotfillup
Thecisternofmylust,andmydesire
Allcontinentimpedimentswouldo'erbear
Thatdidopposemywill:betterMacbeth
Thansuchanonetoreign.
Boundlessintemperance
Innatureisatyranny;ithathbeen
Theuntimelyemptyingofthehappythrone
Andfallofmanykings.Butfearnotyet
Totakeuponyouwhatisyours:youmay
Conveyyourpleasuresinaspaciousplenty,
Andyetseemcold,thetimeyoumaysohoodwink.
Wehavewillingdamesenough:therecannotbe
Thatvultureinyou,todevoursomany
Aswilltogreatnessdedicatethemselves,
Findingitsoinclined.
Withthistheregrows
Inmymostill-composedaffectionsuch
Astanchlessavaricethat,wereIking,
Ishouldcutoffthenoblesfortheirlands,
Desirehisjewelsandthisother'shouse:
Andmymore-havingwouldbeasasauce
Tomakemehungermore;thatIshouldforge
Quarrelsunjustagainstthegoodandloyal,
Destroyingthemforwealth.
Thisavarice
Sticksdeeper,growswithmoreperniciousroot
Thansummer-seeminglust,andithathbeen
Theswordofourslainkings:yetdonotfear;
Scotlandhathfoisonstofillupyourwill.
Ofyourmereown:alltheseareportable,
Withothergracesweigh'd.
ButIhavenone:theking-becominggraces,
Asjustice,verity,temperance,stableness,
Bounty,perseverance,mercy,lowliness,
Devotion,patience,courage,fortitude,
Ihavenorelishofthem,butabound
Inthedivisionofeachseveralcrime,
Actingitmanyways.Nay,hadIpower,Ishould
Pourthesweetmilkofconcordintohell,
Uproartheuniversalpeace,confound
Allunityonearth.
OScotland,Scotland!
Ifsuchaonebefittogovern,speak:
IamasIhavespoken.
Fittogovern!
No,nottolive.Onationmiserable,
Withanuntitledtyrantbloody-scepter'd,
Whenshaltthouseethywholesomedaysagain,
Sincethatthetruestissueofthythrone
Byhisowninterdictionstandsaccursed,
Anddoesblasphemehisbreed?Thyroyalfather
Wasamostsaintedking:thequeenthatborethee,
Ofteneruponherkneesthanonherfeet,
Diedeverydayshelived.Faretheewell!
Theseevilsthourepeat'stuponthyself
Havebanish'dmefromScotland.Omybreast,
Thyhopeendshere!
Macduff,thisnoblepassion,
Childofintegrity,hathfrommysoul
Wipedtheblackscruples,reconciledmythoughts
Tothygoodtruthandhonour.DevilishMacbeth
Bymanyofthesetrainshathsoughttowinme
Intohispower,andmodestwisdomplucksme
Fromover-creduloushaste:butGodabove
Dealbetweentheeandme!forevennow
Iputmyselftothydirection,and
Unspeakmineowndetraction,hereabjure
ThetaintsandblamesIlaiduponmyself,
Forstrangerstomynature.Iamyet
Unknowntowoman,neverwasforsworn,
Scarcelyhavecovetedwhatwasmineown,
Atnotimebrokemyfaith,wouldnotbetray
Thedeviltohisfellowanddelight
Nolessintruththanlife:myfirstfalsespeaking
Wasthisuponmyself:whatIamtruly,
Isthineandmypoorcountry'stocommand:
Whitherindeed,beforethyhere-approach,
OldSiward,withtenthousandwarlikemen,
Alreadyatapoint,wassettingforth.
Nowwe'lltogether;andthechanceofgoodness
Belikeourwarrantedquarrel!Whyareyousilent?
Suchwelcomeandunwelcomethingsatonce
'Tishardtoreconcile.
Well;moreanon.--Comesthekingforth,Iprayyou?
Ay,sir;thereareacrewofwretchedsouls
Thatstayhiscure:theirmaladyconvinces
Thegreatassayofart;butathistouch--
Suchsanctityhathheavengivenhishand--
Theypresentlyamend.
Ithankyou,doctor.
What'sthediseasehemeans?
'Tiscall'dtheevil:
Amostmiraculousworkinthisgoodking;
Whichoften,sincemyhere-remaininEngland,
Ihaveseenhimdo.Howhesolicitsheaven,
Himselfbestknows:butstrangely-visitedpeople,
Allswolnandulcerous,pitifultotheeye,
Themeredespairofsurgery,hecures,
Hangingagoldenstampabouttheirnecks,
Putonwithholyprayers:and'tisspoken,
Tothesucceedingroyaltyheleaves
Thehealingbenediction.Withthisstrangevirtue,
Hehathaheavenlygiftofprophecy,
Andsundryblessingshangabouthisthrone,
Thatspeakhimfullofgrace.
See,whocomeshere?
Mycountryman;butyetIknowhimnot.
Myever-gentlecousin,welcomehither.
Iknowhimnow.GoodGod,betimesremove
Themeansthatmakesusstrangers!
Sir,amen.
StandsScotlandwhereitdid?
Alas,poorcountry!
Almostafraidtoknowitself.Itcannot
Becall'dourmother,butourgrave;wherenothing,
Butwhoknowsnothing,isonceseentosmile;
Wheresighsandgroansandshrieksthatrendtheair
Aremade,notmark'd;whereviolentsorrowseems
Amodernecstasy;thedeadman'sknell
Istherescarceask'dforwho;andgoodmen'slives
Expirebeforetheflowersintheircaps,
Dyingoreretheysicken.
O,relation
Toonice,andyettootrue!
What'sthenewestgrief?
Thatofanhour'sagedothhissthespeaker:
Eachminuteteemsanewone.
Howdoesmywife?
Why,well.
Andallmychildren?
Welltoo.
Thetyranthasnotbatter'dattheirpeace?
No;theywerewellatpeacewhenIdidleave'em.
Butnotaniggardofyourspeech:howgoes't?
WhenIcamehithertotransportthetidings,
WhichIhaveheavilyborne,thereranarumour
Ofmanyworthyfellowsthatwereout;
Whichwastomybeliefwitness'dtherather,
ForthatIsawthetyrant'spowera-foot:
Nowisthetimeofhelp;youreyeinScotland
Wouldcreatesoldiers,makeourwomenfight,
Todofftheirdiredistresses.
Be'ttheircomfort
Wearecomingthither:graciousEnglandhath
LentusgoodSiwardandtenthousandmen;
Anolderandabettersoldiernone
ThatChristendomgivesout.
WouldIcouldanswer
Thiscomfortwiththelike!ButIhavewords
Thatwouldbehowl'doutinthedesertair,
Wherehearingshouldnotlatchthem.
Whatconcernthey?
Thegeneralcause?orisitafee-grief
Duetosomesinglebreast?
Nomindthat'shonest
Butinitsharessomewoe;thoughthemainpart
Pertainstoyoualone.
Ifitbemine,
Keepitnotfromme,quicklyletmehaveit.
Letnotyourearsdespisemytongueforever,
Whichshallpossessthemwiththeheaviestsound
Thateveryettheyheard.
Hum!Iguessatit.
Yourcastleissurprised;yourwifeandbabes
Savagelyslaughter'd:torelatethemanner,
Were,onthequarryofthesemurder'ddeer,
Toaddthedeathofyou.
Mercifulheaven!
What,man!ne'erpullyourhatuponyourbrows;
Givesorrowwords:thegriefthatdoesnotspeak
Whisperstheo'er-fraughtheartandbidsitbreak.
Mychildrentoo?
Wife,children,servants,all
Thatcouldbefound.
AndImustbefromthence!
Mywifekill'dtoo?
Ihavesaid.
Becomforted:
Let'smakeusmedicinesofourgreatrevenge,
Tocurethisdeadlygrief.
Hehasnochildren.Allmyprettyones?
Didyousayall?Ohell-kite!All?
What,allmyprettychickensandtheirdam
Atonefellswoop?
Disputeitlikeaman.
Ishalldoso;
ButImustalsofeelitasaman:
Icannotbutremembersuchthingswere,
Thatweremostprecioustome.Didheavenlookon,
Andwouldnottaketheirpart?SinfulMacduff,
Theywereallstruckforthee!naughtthatIam,
Notfortheirowndemerits,butformine,
Fellslaughterontheirsouls.Heavenrestthemnow!
Bethisthewhetstoneofyoursword:letgrief
Converttoanger;bluntnottheheart,enrageit.
O,Icouldplaythewomanwithmineeyes
Andbraggartwithmytongue!But,gentleheavens,
Cutshortallintermission;fronttofront
BringthouthisfiendofScotlandandmyself;
Withinmysword'slengthsethim;ifhe'scape,
Heavenforgivehimtoo!
Thistunegoesmanly.
Come,gowetotheking;ourpowerisready;
Ourlackisnothingbutourleave;Macbeth
Isripeforshaking,andthepowersabove
Putontheirinstruments.Receivewhatcheeryoumay:
Thenightislongthatneverfindstheday.
Ihavetwonightswatchedwithyou,butcanperceive
notruthinyourreport.Whenwasitshelastwalked?
Sincehismajestywentintothefield,Ihaveseen
herrisefromherbed,throwhernight-gownupon
her,unlockhercloset,takeforthpaper,foldit,
writeupon't,readit,afterwardssealit,andagain
returntobed;yetallthiswhileinamostfastsleep.
Agreatperturbationinnature,toreceiveatonce
thebenefitofsleep,anddotheeffectsof
watching!Inthisslumberyagitation,besidesher
walkingandotheractualperformances,what,atany
time,haveyouheardhersay?
That,sir,whichIwillnotreportafterher.
Youmaytome:and'tismostmeetyoushould.
Neithertoyounoranyone;havingnowitnessto
confirmmyspeech.
Loyou,hereshecomes!Thisisherveryguise;
and,uponmylife,fastasleep.Observeher;standclose.
Howcameshebythatlight?
Why,itstoodbyher:shehaslightbyher
continually;'tishercommand.
Yousee,hereyesareopen.
Ay,buttheirsenseisshut.
Whatisitshedoesnow?Look,howsherubsherhands.
Itisanaccustomedactionwithher,toseemthus
washingherhands:Ihaveknownhercontinuein
thisaquarterofanhour.
Yethere'saspot.
Hark!shespeaks:Iwillsetdownwhatcomesfrom
her,tosatisfymyremembrancethemorestrongly.
Out,damnedspot!out,Isay!--One:two:why,
then,'tistimetodo't.--Hellismurky!--Fie,my
lord,fie!asoldier,andafeard?Whatneedwe
fearwhoknowsit,whennonecancallourpowerto
account?--Yetwhowouldhavethoughttheoldman
tohavehadsomuchbloodinhim.
Doyoumarkthat?
ThethaneofFifehadawife:whereisshenow?--
What,willthesehandsne'erbeclean?--Nomoreo'
that,mylord,nomoreo'that:youmarallwith
thisstarting.
Goto,goto;youhaveknownwhatyoushouldnot.
Shehasspokewhatsheshouldnot,Iamsureof
that:heavenknowswhatshehasknown.
Here'sthesmellofthebloodstill:allthe
perfumesofArabiawillnotsweetenthislittle
hand.Oh,oh,oh!
Whatasighisthere!Theheartissorelycharged.
Iwouldnothavesuchaheartinmybosomforthe
dignityofthewholebody.
Well,well,well,--
PrayGoditbe,sir.
Thisdiseaseisbeyondmypractise:yetIhaveknown
thosewhichhavewalkedintheirsleepwhohavedied
holilyintheirbeds.
Washyourhands,putonyournightgown;looknotso
pale.--Itellyouyetagain,Banquo'sburied;he
cannotcomeouton'sgrave.
Evenso?
Tobed,tobed!there'sknockingatthegate:
come,come,come,come,givemeyourhand.What's
donecannotbeundone.--Tobed,tobed,tobed!
Willshegonowtobed?
Directly.
Foulwhisperingsareabroad:unnaturaldeeds
Dobreedunnaturaltroubles:infectedminds
Totheirdeafpillowswilldischargetheirsecrets:
Moreneedsshethedivinethanthephysician.
God,Godforgiveusall!Lookafterher;
Removefromherthemeansofallannoyance,
Andstillkeepeyesuponher.So,goodnight:
Mymindshehasmated,andamazedmysight.
Ithink,butdarenotspeak.
Goodnight,gooddoctor.
TheEnglishpowerisnear,ledonbyMalcolm,
HisuncleSiwardandthegoodMacduff:
Revengesburninthem;fortheirdearcauses
Wouldtothebleedingandthegrimalarm
Excitethemortifiedman.
NearBirnamwood
Shallwewellmeetthem;thatwayaretheycoming.
WhoknowsifDonalbainbewithhisbrother?
Forcertain,sir,heisnot:Ihaveafile
Ofallthegentry:thereisSiward'sson,
Andmanyunroughyouthsthatevennow
Protesttheirfirstofmanhood.
Whatdoesthetyrant?
GreatDunsinanehestronglyfortifies:
Somesayhe'smad;othersthatlesserhatehim
Docallitvaliantfury:but,forcertain,
Hecannotbucklehisdistemper'dcause
Withinthebeltofrule.
Nowdoeshefeel
Hissecretmurdersstickingonhishands;
Nowminutelyrevoltsupbraidhisfaith-breach;
Thosehecommandsmoveonlyincommand,
Nothinginlove:nowdoeshefeelhistitle
Hanglooseabouthim,likeagiant'srobe
Uponadwarfishthief.
Whothenshallblame
Hispester'dsensestorecoilandstart,
Whenallthatiswithinhimdoescondemn
Itselfforbeingthere?
Well,marchweon,
Togiveobediencewhere'tistrulyowed:
Meetwethemedicineofthesicklyweal,
Andwithhimpourweinourcountry'spurge
Eachdropofus.
Orsomuchasitneeds,
Todewthesovereignfloweranddrowntheweeds.
MakeweourmarchtowardsBirnam.
Bringmenomorereports;letthemflyall:
TillBirnamwoodremovetoDunsinane,
Icannottaintwithfear.What'stheboyMalcolm?
Washenotbornofwoman?Thespiritsthatknow
Allmortalconsequenceshavepronouncedmethus:
'Fearnot,Macbeth;nomanthat'sbornofwoman
Shalle'erhavepoweruponthee.'Thenfly,
falsethanes,
AndminglewiththeEnglishepicures:
ThemindIswaybyandtheheartIbear
Shallneversagwithdoubtnorshakewithfear.
Thedevildamntheeblack,thoucream-facedloon!
Wheregot'stthouthatgooselook?
Thereistenthousand--
Geese,villain!
Soldiers,sir.
Goprickthyface,andover-redthyfear,
Thoulily-liver'dboy.Whatsoldiers,patch?
Deathofthysoul!thoselinencheeksofthine
Arecounsellorstofear.Whatsoldiers,whey-face?
TheEnglishforce,sopleaseyou.
Takethyfacehence.
Seyton!--Iamsickatheart,
WhenIbehold--Seyton,Isay!--Thispush
Willcheermeever,ordisseatmenow.
Ihavelivedlongenough:mywayoflife
Isfall'nintothesear,theyellowleaf;
Andthatwhichshouldaccompanyoldage,
Ashonour,love,obedience,troopsoffriends,
Imustnotlooktohave;but,intheirstead,
Curses,notloudbutdeep,mouth-honour,breath,
Whichthepoorheartwouldfaindeny,anddarenot.Seyton!
Whatisyourgraciouspleasure?
Whatnewsmore?
Allisconfirm'd,mylord,whichwasreported.
I'llfighttillfrommybonesmyfleshbehack'd.
Givememyarmour.
'Tisnotneededyet.
I'llputiton.
Sendoutmorehorses;skirrthecountryround;
Hangthosethattalkoffear.Givememinearmour.
Howdoesyourpatient,doctor?
Notsosick,mylord,
Assheistroubledwiththickcomingfancies,
Thatkeepherfromherrest.
Cureherofthat.
Canstthounotministertoaminddiseased,
Pluckfromthememoryarootedsorrow,
Razeoutthewrittentroublesofthebrain
Andwithsomesweetobliviousantidote
Cleansethestuff'dbosomofthatperilousstuff
Whichweighsupontheheart?
Thereinthepatient
Mustministertohimself.
Throwphysictothedogs;I'llnoneofit.
Come,putminearmouron;givememystaff.
Seyton,sendout.Doctor,thethanesflyfromme.
Come,sir,dispatch.Ifthoucouldst,doctor,cast
Thewaterofmyland,findherdisease,
Andpurgeittoasoundandpristinehealth,
Iwouldapplaudtheetotheveryecho,
Thatshouldapplaudagain.--Pull'toff,Isay.--
Whatrhubarb,cyme,orwhatpurgativedrug,
WouldscourtheseEnglishhence?Hear'stthouofthem?
Ay,mygoodlord;yourroyalpreparation
Makesushearsomething.
Bringitafterme.
Iwillnotbeafraidofdeathandbane,
TillBirnamforestcometoDunsinane.
<STAGEDIR>Aside</STAGEDIR>WereIfromDunsinaneawayandclear,
Profitagainshouldhardlydrawmehere.
Cousins,Ihopethedaysarenearathand
Thatchamberswillbesafe.
Wedoubtitnothing.
Whatwoodisthisbeforeus?
ThewoodofBirnam.
Leteverysoldierhewhimdownabough
Andbear'tbeforehim:therebyshallweshadow
Thenumbersofourhostandmakediscovery
Errinreportofus.
Itshallbedone.
Welearnnootherbuttheconfidenttyrant
KeepsstillinDunsinane,andwillendure
Oursettingdownbefore't.
'Tishismainhope:
Forwherethereisadvantagetobegiven,
Bothmoreandlesshavegivenhimtherevolt,
Andnoneservewithhimbutconstrainedthings
Whoseheartsareabsenttoo.
Letourjustcensures
Attendthetrueevent,andputweon
Industrioussoldiership.
Thetimeapproaches
Thatwillwithduedecisionmakeusknow
Whatweshallsaywehaveandwhatweowe.
Thoughtsspeculativetheirunsurehopesrelate,
Butcertainissuestrokesmustarbitrate:
Towardswhichadvancethewar.
Hangoutourbannersontheoutwardwalls;
Thecryisstill'Theycome:'ourcastle'sstrength
Willlaughasiegetoscorn:hereletthemlie
Tillfamineandtheagueeatthemup:
Weretheynotforcedwiththosethatshouldbeours,
Wemighthavemetthemdareful,beardtobeard,
Andbeatthembackwardhome.
Whatisthatnoise?
Itisthecryofwomen,mygoodlord.
Ihavealmostforgotthetasteoffears;
Thetimehasbeen,mysenseswouldhavecool'd
Tohearanight-shriek;andmyfellofhair
Wouldatadismaltreatiserouseandstir
Aslifewerein't:Ihavesupp'dfullwithhorrors;
Direness,familiartomyslaughterousthoughts
Cannotoncestartme.
Whereforewasthatcry?
Thequeen,mylord,isdead.
Sheshouldhavediedhereafter;
Therewouldhavebeenatimeforsuchaword.
To-morrow,andto-morrow,andto-morrow,
Creepsinthispettypacefromdaytoday
Tothelastsyllableofrecordedtime,
Andallouryesterdayshavelightedfools
Thewaytodustydeath.Out,out,briefcandle!
Life'sbutawalkingshadow,apoorplayer
Thatstrutsandfretshishouruponthestage
Andthenisheardnomore:itisatale
Toldbyanidiot,fullofsoundandfury,
Signifyingnothing.
Thoucomesttousethytongue;thystoryquickly.
Graciousmylord,
IshouldreportthatwhichIsayIsaw,
Butknownothowtodoit.
Well,say,sir.
AsIdidstandmywatchuponthehill,
Ilook'dtowardBirnam,andanon,methought,
Thewoodbegantomove.
Liarandslave!
Letmeendureyourwrath,if'tbenotso:
Withinthisthreemilemayyouseeitcoming;
Isay,amovinggrove.
Ifthouspeak'stfalse,
Uponthenexttreeshaltthouhangalive,
Tillfamineclingthee:ifthyspeechbesooth,
Icarenotifthoudostformeasmuch.
Ipullinresolution,andbegin
Todoubttheequivocationofthefiend
Thatliesliketruth:'Fearnot,tillBirnamwood
DocometoDunsinane:'andnowawood
ComestowardDunsinane.Arm,arm,andout!
Ifthiswhichheavouchesdoesappear,
Thereisnorflyinghencenortarryinghere.
Igintobeawearyofthesun,
Andwishtheestateo'theworldwerenowundone.
Ringthealarum-bell!Blow,wind!come,wrack!
Atleastwe'lldiewithharnessonourback.
Nownearenough:yourleafyscreensthrowdown.
Andshowlikethoseyouare.You,worthyuncle,
Shall,withmycousin,yourright-nobleson,
Leadourfirstbattle:worthyMacduffandwe
Shalltakeupon'swhatelseremainstodo,
Accordingtoourorder.
Fareyouwell.
Dowebutfindthetyrant'spowerto-night,
Letusbebeaten,ifwecannotfight.
Makeallourtrumpetsspeak;givethemallbreath,
Thoseclamorousharbingersofbloodanddeath.
Theyhavetiedmetoastake;Icannotfly,
But,bear-like,Imustfightthecourse.What'she
Thatwasnotbornofwoman?Suchaone
AmItofear,ornone.
Whatisthyname?
Thou'ltbeafraidtohearit.
No;thoughthoucall'stthyselfahottername
Thananyisinhell.
Myname'sMacbeth.
Thedevilhimselfcouldnotpronounceatitle
Morehatefultomineear.
No,normorefearful.
Thouliest,abhorredtyrant;withmysword
I'llprovetheliethouspeak'st.
Thouwastbornofwoman
ButswordsIsmileat,weaponslaughtoscorn,
Brandish'dbymanthat'sofawomanborn.
Thatwaythenoiseis.Tyrant,showthyface!
Ifthoube'stslainandwithnostrokeofmine,
Mywifeandchildren'sghostswillhauntmestill.
Icannotstrikeatwretchedkerns,whosearms
Arehiredtobeartheirstaves:eitherthou,Macbeth,
Orelsemyswordwithanunbatter'dedge
Isheatheagainundeeded.Therethoushouldstbe;
Bythisgreatclatter,oneofgreatestnote
Seemsbruited.Letmefindhim,fortune!
AndmoreIbegnot.
Thisway,mylord;thecastle'sgentlyrender'd:
Thetyrant'speopleonbothsidesdofight;
Thenoblethanesdobravelyinthewar;
Thedayalmostitselfprofessesyours,
Andlittleistodo.
Wehavemetwithfoes
Thatstrikebesideus.
Enter,sir,thecastle.
WhyshouldIplaytheRomanfool,anddie
Onmineownsword?whilesIseelives,thegashes
Dobetteruponthem.
Turn,hell-hound,turn!
OfallmenelseIhaveavoidedthee:
Butgettheeback;mysoulistoomuchcharged
Withbloodofthinealready.
Ihavenowords:
Myvoiceisinmysword:thoubloodiervillain
Thantermscangivetheeout!
Thoulosestlabour:
Aseasymaystthoutheintrenchantair
Withthykeenswordimpressasmakemebleed:
Letfallthybladeonvulnerablecrests;
Ibearacharmedlife,whichmustnotyield,
Tooneofwomanborn.
Despairthycharm;
Andlettheangelwhomthoustillhastserved
Tellthee,Macduffwasfromhismother'swomb
Untimelyripp'd.
Accursedbethattonguethattellsmeso,
Forithathcow'dmybetterpartofman!
Andbethesejugglingfiendsnomorebelieved,
Thatpalterwithusinadoublesense;
Thatkeepthewordofpromisetoourear,
Andbreakittoourhope.I'llnotfightwiththee.
Thenyieldthee,coward,
Andlivetobetheshowandgazeo'thetime:
We'llhavethee,asourrarermonstersare,
Paintedonapole,andunderwrit,
'Heremayyouseethetyrant.'
Iwillnotyield,
TokissthegroundbeforeyoungMalcolm'sfeet,
Andtobebaitedwiththerabble'scurse.
ThoughBirnamwoodbecometoDunsinane,
Andthouopposed,beingofnowomanborn,
YetIwilltrythelast.Beforemybody
Ithrowmywarlikeshield.Layon,Macduff,
Anddamn'dbehimthatfirstcries,'Hold,enough!'
Iwouldthefriendswemissweresafearrived.
Somemustgooff:andyet,bytheseIsee,
Sogreatadayasthisischeaplybought.
Macduffismissing,andyournobleson.
Yourson,mylord,haspaidasoldier'sdebt:
Heonlylivedbuttillhewasaman;
Thewhichnosoonerhadhisprowessconfirm'd
Intheunshrinkingstationwherehefought,
Butlikeamanhedied.
Thenheisdead?
Ay,andbroughtoffthefield:yourcauseofsorrow
Mustnotbemeasuredbyhisworth,forthen
Ithathnoend.
Hadhehishurtsbefore?
Ay,onthefront.
Whythen,God'ssoldierbehe!
HadIasmanysonsasIhavehairs,
Iwouldnotwishthemtoafairerdeath:
Andso,hisknellisknoll'd.
He'sworthmoresorrow,
AndthatI'llspendforhim.
He'sworthnomore
Theysayhepartedwell,andpaidhisscore:
Andso,Godbewithhim!Herecomesnewercomfort.
Hail,king!forsothouart:behold,wherestands
Theusurper'scursedhead:thetimeisfree:
Iseetheecompass'dwiththykingdom'spearl,
Thatspeakmysalutationintheirminds;
WhosevoicesIdesirealoudwithmine:
Hail,KingofScotland!
Hail,KingofScotland!
Weshallnotspendalargeexpenseoftime
Beforewereckonwithyourseveralloves,
Andmakeusevenwithyou.Mythanesandkinsmen,
Henceforthbeearls,thefirstthateverScotland
Insuchanhonournamed.What'smoretodo,
Whichwouldbeplantednewlywiththetime,
Ascallinghomeourexiledfriendsabroad
Thatfledthesnaresofwatchfultyranny;
Producingforththecruelministers
Ofthisdeadbutcherandhisfiend-likequeen,
Who,as'tisthought,byselfandviolenthands
Tookoffherlife;this,andwhatneedfulelse
Thatcallsuponus,bythegraceofGrace,
Wewillperforminmeasure,timeandplace:
So,thankstoallatonceandtoeachone,
Whomweinvitetoseeuscrown'datScone.
